
Sound a sennet. Enter RICHARD, in pomp, as KING; BUCKINGHAM, CATESBY,
RATCLIFF, LOVEL, a PAGE, and others
  KING RICHARD. Stand all apart. Cousin of Buckingham!
  BUCKINGHAM. My gracious sovereign?
  KING RICHARD. Give me thy hand.
                           [Here he ascendeth the throne. Sound]
    Thus high, by thy advice
    And thy assistance, is King Richard seated.
    But shall we wear these glories for a day;
    Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?
  BUCKINGHAM. Still live they, and for ever let them last!
  KING RICHARD. Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
    To try if thou be current gold indeed.
    Young Edward lives-think now what I would speak.
  BUCKINGHAM. Say on, my loving lord.
  KING RICHARD. Why, Buckingham, I say I would be King.
  BUCKINGHAM. Why, so you are, my thrice-renowned lord.
  KING RICHARD. Ha! am I King? 'Tis so; but Edward lives.
  BUCKINGHAM. True, noble Prince.
  KING RICHARD. O bitter consequence:
    That Edward still should live-true noble Prince!
    Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull.
    Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead.
    And I would have it suddenly perform'd.
    What say'st thou now? Speak suddenly, be brief.
  BUCKINGHAM. Your Grace may do your pleasure.
  KING RICHARD. Tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes.
    Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
  BUCKINGHAM. Give me some little breath, some pause,
    dear Lord,
    Before I positively speak in this.
    I will resolve you herein presently. Exit
  CATESBY. [Aside to another] The King is angry; see, he
    gnaws his lip.
  KING RICHARD. I will converse with iron-witted fools
                                      [Descends from the throne]
    And unrespective boys; none are for me
    That look into me with considerate eyes.
    High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
    Boy!
  PAGE. My lord?
  KING RICHARD. Know'st thou not any whom corrupting
    gold
    Will tempt unto a close exploit of death?
  PAGE. I know a discontented gentleman
    Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit.
    Gold were as good as twenty orators,
    And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.
  KING RICHARD. What is his name?
  PAGE. His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.
  KING RICHARD. I partly know the man. Go, call him hither,
    boy. Exit PAGE
    The deep-revolving witty Buckingham
    No more shall be the neighbour to my counsels.
    Hath he so long held out with me, untir'd,
    And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
Enter STANLEY

    How now, Lord Stanley! What's the news?
  STANLEY. Know, my loving lord,
    The Marquis Dorset, as I hear, is fled
    To Richmond, in the parts where he abides. [Stands apart]
  KING RICHARD. Come hither, Catesby. Rumour it abroad
    That Anne, my wife, is very grievous sick;
    I will take order for her keeping close.
    Inquire me out some mean poor gentleman,
    Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter-
    The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
    Look how thou dream'st! I say again, give out
    That Anne, my queen, is sick and like to die.
    About it; for it stands me much upon
    To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
                                                    Exit CATESBY
    I must be married to my brother's daughter,
    Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
    Murder her brothers, and then marry her!
    Uncertain way of gain! But I am in
    So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin.
    Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
Re-enter PAGE, with TYRREL

    Is thy name Tyrrel?
  TYRREL. James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
  KING RICHARD. Art thou, indeed?
  TYRREL. Prove me, my gracious lord.
  KING RICHARD. Dar'st'thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
  TYRREL. Please you;
    But I had rather kill two enemies.
  KING RICHARD. Why, then thou hast it. Two deep enemies,
    Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleep's disturbers,
    Are they that I would have thee deal upon.
  TYRREL, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
  TYRREL. Let me have open means to come to them,
    And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them.
  KING RICHARD. Thou sing'st sweet music. Hark, come
    hither, Tyrrel.
    Go, by this token. Rise, and lend thine ear. [Whispers]
    There is no more but so: say it is done,
    And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.
  TYRREL. I will dispatch it straight. Exit
Re-enter BUCKINGHAM

    BUCKINGHAM. My lord, I have consider'd in my mind
    The late request that you did sound me in.
  KING RICHARD. Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to
    Richmond.
  BUCKINGHAM. I hear the news, my lord.
  KING RICHARD. Stanley, he is your wife's son: well, look
    unto it.
  BUCKINGHAM. My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,
    For which your honour and your faith is pawn'd:
    Th' earldom of Hereford and the movables
    Which you have promised I shall possess.
  KING RICHARD. Stanley, look to your wife; if she convey
    Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
  BUCKINGHAM. What says your Highness to my just request?
  KING RICHARD. I do remember me: Henry the Sixth
    Did prophesy that Richmond should be King,
    When Richmond was a little peevish boy.
    A king!-perhaps-
  BUCKINGHAM. My lord-
  KING RICHARD. How chance the prophet could not at that
    time
    Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?
  BUCKINGHAM. My lord, your promise for the earldom-
  KING RICHARD. Richmond! When last I was at Exeter,
    The mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle
    And call'd it Rugemount, at which name I started,
    Because a bard of Ireland told me once
    I should not live long after I saw Richmond.
  BUCKINGHAM. My lord-
  KING RICHARD. Ay, what's o'clock?
  BUCKINGHAM. I am thus bold to put your Grace in mind
    Of what you promis'd me.
  KING RICHARD. Well, but o'clock?
  BUCKINGHAM. Upon the stroke of ten.
  KING RICHARD. Well, let it strike.
  BUCKINGHAM. Why let it strike?
  KING RICHARD. Because that like a Jack thou keep'st the
    stroke
    Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
    I am not in the giving vein to-day.
  BUCKINGHAM. May it please you to resolve me in my suit.
  KING RICHARD. Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.
                                       Exeunt all but Buckingham
  BUCKINGHAM. And is it thus? Repays he my deep service
    With such contempt? Made I him King for this?
    O, let me think on Hastings, and be gone
    To Brecknock while my fearful head is on! Exit
SCENE 3.
London. The palace

Enter TYRREL

  TYRREL. The tyrannous and bloody act is done,
    The most arch deed of piteous massacre
    That ever yet this land was guilty of.
    Dighton and Forrest, who I did suborn
    To do this piece of ruthless butchery,
    Albeit they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs,
    Melted with tenderness and mild compassion,
    Wept like two children in their deaths' sad story.
    'O, thus' quoth Dighton 'lay the gentle babes'-
    'Thus, thus,' quoth Forrest 'girdling one another
    Within their alabaster innocent arms.
    Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,
    And in their summer beauty kiss'd each other.
    A book of prayers on their pillow lay;
    Which once,' quoth Forrest 'almost chang'd my mind;
    But, O, the devil'-there the villain stopp'd;
    When Dighton thus told on: 'We smothered
    The most replenished sweet work of nature
    That from the prime creation e'er she framed.'
    Hence both are gone with conscience and remorse
    They could not speak; and so I left them both,
    To bear this tidings to the bloody King.
Enter KING RICHARD

    And here he comes. All health, my sovereign lord!
  KING RICHARD. Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
  TYRREL. If to have done the thing you gave in charge
    Beget your happiness, be happy then,
    For it is done.
  KING RICHARD. But didst thou see them dead?
  TYRREL. I did, my lord.
  KING RICHARD. And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
  TYRREL. The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them;
    But where, to say the truth, I do not know.
  KING RICHARD. Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper,
    When thou shalt tell the process of their death.
    Meantime, but think how I may do thee good
    And be inheritor of thy desire.
    Farewell till then.
  TYRREL. I humbly take my leave. Exit
  KING RICHARD. The son of Clarence have I pent up close;
    His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage;
    The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
    And Anne my wife hath bid this world good night.
    Now, for I know the Britaine Richmond aims
    At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
    And by that knot looks proudly on the crown,
    To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.
Enter RATCLIFF

  RATCLIFF. My lord!
  KING RICHARD. Good or bad news, that thou com'st in so
    bluntly?
  RATCLIFF. Bad news, my lord: Morton is fled to Richmond;
    And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen,
    Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
  KING RICHARD. Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
    Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength.
    Come, I have learn'd that fearful commenting
    Is leaden servitor to dull delay;
    Delay leads impotent and snail-pac'd beggary.
    Then fiery expedition be my wing,
    Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king!
    Go, muster men. My counsel is my shield.
    We must be brief when traitors brave the field. Exeunt
SCENE 4.
London. Before the palace

Enter old QUEEN MARGARET

  QUEEN MARGARET. So now prosperity begins to mellow
    And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
    Here in these confines slily have I lurk'd
    To watch the waning of mine enemies.
    A dire induction am I witness to,
    And will to France, hoping the consequence
    Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
    Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret. Who comes here?
                                                       [Retires]
Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH and the DUCHESS OF YORK

  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Ah, my poor princes! ah, my tender
    babes!
    My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets!
    If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
    And be not fix'd in doom perpetual,
    Hover about me with your airy wings
    And hear your mother's lamentation.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Hover about her; say that right for right
    Hath dimm'd your infant morn to aged night.
  DUCHESS. So many miseries have craz'd my voice
    That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.
    Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet,
    Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle
    lambs
    And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
    When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
  QUEEN MARGARET. When holy Harry died, and my sweet
    son.
  DUCHESS. Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost,
    Woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurp'd,
    Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
    Rest thy unrest on England's lawful earth, [Sitting down]
    Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a
    grave
    As thou canst yield a melancholy seat!
    Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
    Ah, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
                                           [Sitting down by her]
  QUEEN MARGARET. [Coming forward] If ancient sorrow be
    most reverend,
    Give mine the benefit of seniory,
    And let my griefs frown on the upper hand.
    If sorrow can admit society, [Sitting down with them]
    Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine.
    I had an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him;
    I had a husband, till a Richard kill'd him:
    Thou hadst an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him;
    Thou hadst a Richard, till a Richard kill'd him.
  DUCHESS. I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him;
    I had a Rutland too, thou holp'st to kill him.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard
    kill'd him.
    From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
    A hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death.
    That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes
    To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood,
    That foul defacer of God's handiwork,
    That excellent grand tyrant of the earth
    That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls,
    Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.
    O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
    How do I thank thee that this carnal cur
    Preys on the issue of his mother's body
    And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!
  DUCHESS. O Harry's wife, triumph not in my woes!
    God witness with me, I have wept for thine.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Bear with me; I am hungry for revenge,
    And now I cloy me with beholding it.
    Thy Edward he is dead, that kill'd my Edward;
    The other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;
    Young York he is but boot, because both they
    Match'd not the high perfection of my loss.
    Thy Clarence he is dead that stabb'd my Edward;
    And the beholders of this frantic play,
    Th' adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
    Untimely smother'd in their dusky graves.
    Richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer;
    Only reserv'd their factor to buy souls
    And send them thither. But at hand, at hand,
    Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.
    Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray,
    To have him suddenly convey'd from hence.
    Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I pray,
    That I may live and say 'The dog is dead.'
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. O, thou didst prophesy the time would
      come
    That I should wish for thee to help me curse
    That bottled spider, that foul bunch-back'd toad!
  QUEEN MARGARET. I Call'd thee then vain flourish of my
      fortune;
    I call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen,
    The presentation of but what I was,
    The flattering index of a direful pageant,
    One heav'd a-high to be hurl'd down below,
    A mother only mock'd with two fair babes,
    A dream of what thou wast, a garish flag
    To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
    A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble,
    A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
    Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?
    Where be thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy?
    Who sues, and kneels, and says 'God save the Queen'?
    Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?
    Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?
    Decline an this, and see what now thou art:
    For happy wife, a most distressed widow;
    For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
    For one being su'd to, one that humbly sues;
    For Queen, a very caitiff crown'd with care;
    For she that scorn'd at me, now scorn'd of me;
    For she being fear'd of all, now fearing one;
    For she commanding all, obey'd of none.
    Thus hath the course of justice whirl'd about
    And left thee but a very prey to time,
    Having no more but thought of what thou wast
    To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
    Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not
    Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
    Now thy proud neck bears half my burden'd yoke,
    From which even here I slip my weary head
    And leave the burden of it all on thee.
    Farewell, York's wife, and queen of sad mischance;
    These English woes shall make me smile in France.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. O thou well skill'd in curses, stay awhile
    And teach me how to curse mine enemies!
  QUEEN MARGARET. Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the
      days;
    Compare dead happiness with living woe;
    Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were,
    And he that slew them fouler than he is.
    Bett'ring thy loss makes the bad-causer worse;
    Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. My words are dull; O, quicken them
    with thine!
  QUEEN MARGARET. Thy woes will make them sharp and
    pierce like mine. Exit
  DUCHESS. Why should calamity be fun of words?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Windy attorneys to their client woes,
    Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
    Poor breathing orators of miseries,
    Let them have scope; though what they will impart
    Help nothing else, yet do they case the heart.
  DUCHESS. If so, then be not tongue-tied. Go with me,
    And in the breath of bitter words let's smother
    My damned son that thy two sweet sons smother'd.
    The trumpet sounds; be copious in exclaims.
         Enter KING RICHARD and his train, marching with
                     drums and trumpets
  KING RICHARD. Who intercepts me in my expedition?
  DUCHESS. O, she that might have intercepted thee,
    By strangling thee in her accursed womb,
    From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Hidest thou that forehead with a golden
    crown
    Where't should be branded, if that right were right,
    The slaughter of the Prince that ow'd that crown,
    And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?
    Tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children?
  DUCHESS. Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother
    Clarence?
    And little Ned Plantagenet, his son?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Where is the gentle Rivers, Vaughan,
    Grey?
  DUCHESS. Where is kind Hastings?
  KING RICHARD. A flourish, trumpets! Strike alarum, drums!
    Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women
    Rail on the Lord's anointed. Strike, I say!
                                             [Flourish. Alarums]
    Either be patient and entreat me fair,
    Or with the clamorous report of war
    Thus will I drown your exclamations.
  DUCHESS. Art thou my son?
  KING RICHARD. Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
  DUCHESS. Then patiently hear my impatience.
  KING RICHARD. Madam, I have a touch of your condition
    That cannot brook the accent of reproof.
  DUCHESS. O, let me speak!
  KING RICHARD. Do, then; but I'll not hear.
  DUCHESS. I will be mild and gentle in my words.
  KING RICHARD. And brief, good mother; for I am in haste.
  DUCHESS. Art thou so hasty? I have stay'd for thee,
    God knows, in torment and in agony.
  KING RICHARD. And came I not at last to comfort you?
  DUCHESS. No, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well
    Thou cam'st on earth to make the earth my hell.
    A grievous burden was thy birth to me;
    Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;
    Thy school-days frightful, desp'rate, wild, and furious;
    Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous;
    Thy age confirm'd, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody,
    More mild, but yet more harmful-kind in hatred.
    What comfortable hour canst thou name
    That ever grac'd me with thy company?
  KING RICHARD. Faith, none but Humphrey Hour, that call'd
    your Grace
    To breakfast once forth of my company.
    If I be so disgracious in your eye,
    Let me march on and not offend you, madam.
    Strike up the drum.
  DUCHESS. I prithee hear me speak.
  KING RICHARD. You speak too bitterly.
  DUCHESS. Hear me a word;
    For I shall never speak to thee again.
  KING RICHARD. So.
  DUCHESS. Either thou wilt die by God's just ordinance
    Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror;
    Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish
    And never more behold thy face again.
    Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse,
    Which in the day of battle tire thee more
    Than all the complete armour that thou wear'st!
    My prayers on the adverse party fight;
    And there the little souls of Edward's children
    Whisper the spirits of thine enemies
    And promise them success and victory.
    Bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end.
    Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend. Exit
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Though far more cause, yet much less
      spirit to curse
    Abides in me; I say amen to her.
  KING RICHARD. Stay, madam, I must talk a word with you.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. I have no moe sons of the royal blood
    For thee to slaughter. For my daughters, Richard,
    They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens;
    And therefore level not to hit their lives.
  KING RICHARD. You have a daughter call'd Elizabeth.
    Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. And must she die for this? O, let her
      live,
    And I'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,
    Slander myself as false to Edward's bed,
    Throw over her the veil of infamy;
    So she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter,
    I will confess she was not Edward's daughter.
  KING RICHARD. Wrong not her birth; she is a royal
    Princess.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. To save her life I'll say she is not so.
  KING RICHARD. Her life is safest only in her birth.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. And only in that safety died her
      brothers.
  KING RICHARD. Lo, at their birth good stars were opposite.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. No, to their lives ill friends were
      contrary.
  KING RICHARD. All unavoided is the doom of destiny.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. True, when avoided grace makes destiny.
    My babes were destin'd to a fairer death,
    If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.
  KING RICHARD. You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Cousins, indeed; and by their uncle
      cozen'd
    Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
    Whose hand soever lanc'd their tender hearts,
    Thy head, an indirectly, gave direction.
    No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt
    Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart
    To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
    But that stiff use of grief makes wild grief tame,
    My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
    Till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes;
    And I, in such a desp'rate bay of death,
    Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft,
    Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
  KING RICHARD. Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
    And dangerous success of bloody wars,
    As I intend more good to you and yours
    Than ever you or yours by me were harm'd!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. What good is cover'd with the face of
      heaven,
    To be discover'd, that can do me good?
  KING RICHARD. advancement of your children, gentle
    lady.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Up to some scaffold, there to lose their
    heads?
  KING RICHARD. Unto the dignity and height of Fortune,
    The high imperial type of this earth's glory.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Flatter my sorrow with report of it;
    Tell me what state, what dignity, what honour,
    Canst thou demise to any child of mine?
  KING RICHARD. Even all I have-ay, and myself and all
    Will I withal endow a child of thine;
    So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
    Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
    Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Be brief, lest that the process of thy
      kindness
    Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
  KING RICHARD. Then know, that from my soul I love thy
    daughter.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. My daughter's mother thinks it with her
    soul.
  KING RICHARD. What do you think?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. That thou dost love my daughter from
      thy soul.
    So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers,
    And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.
  KING RICHARD. Be not so hasty to confound my meaning.
    I mean that with my soul I love thy daughter
    And do intend to make her Queen of England.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Well, then, who dost thou mean shall be
    her king?
  KING RICHARD. Even he that makes her Queen. Who else
    should be?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. What, thou?
  KING RICHARD. Even so. How think you of it?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. How canst thou woo her?
  KING RICHARD. That would I learn of you,
    As one being best acquainted with her humour.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. And wilt thou learn of me?
  KING RICHARD. Madam, with all my heart.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Send to her, by the man that slew her
    brothers,
    A pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave
    'Edward' and 'York.' Then haply will she weep;
    Therefore present to her-as sometimes Margaret
    Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood-
    A handkerchief; which, say to her, did drain
    The purple sap from her sweet brother's body,
    And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.
    If this inducement move her not to love,
    Send her a letter of thy noble deeds;
    Tell her thou mad'st away her uncle Clarence,
    Her uncle Rivers; ay, and for her sake
    Mad'st quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.
  KING RICHARD. You mock me, madam; this is not the way
    To win your daughter.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. There is no other way;
    Unless thou couldst put on some other shape
    And not be Richard that hath done all this.
  KING RICHARD. Say that I did all this for love of her.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but
      hate thee,
    Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
  KING RICHARD. Look what is done cannot be now amended.
    Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
    Which after-hours gives leisure to repent.
    If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
    To make amends I'll give it to your daughter.
    If I have kill'd the issue of your womb,
    To quicken your increase I will beget
    Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter.
    A grandam's name is little less in love
    Than is the doating title of a mother;
    They are as children but one step below,
    Even of your metal, of your very blood;
    Of all one pain, save for a night of groans
    Endur'd of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
    Your children were vexation to your youth;
    But mine shall be a comfort to your age.
    The loss you have is but a son being King,
    And by that loss your daughter is made Queen.
    I cannot make you what amends I would,
    Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
    Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul
    Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
    This fair alliance quickly shall can home
    To high promotions and great dignity.
    The King, that calls your beauteous daughter wife,
    Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother;
    Again shall you be mother to a king,
    And all the ruins of distressful times
    Repair'd with double riches of content.
    What! we have many goodly days to see.
    The liquid drops of tears that you have shed
    Shall come again, transform'd to orient pearl,
    Advantaging their loan with interest
    Of ten times double gain of happiness.
    Go, then, my mother, to thy daughter go;
    Make bold her bashful years with your experience;
    Prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale;
    Put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame
    Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princes
    With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys.
    And when this arm of mine hath chastised
    The petty rebel, dull-brain'd Buckingham,
    Bound with triumphant garlands will I come,
    And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
    To whom I will retail my conquest won,
    And she shall be sole victoress, Caesar's Caesar.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. What were I best to say? Her father's
      brother
    Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle?
    Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
    Under what title shall I woo for thee
    That God, the law, my honour, and her love
    Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
  KING RICHARD. Infer fair England's peace by this alliance.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Which she shall purchase with
    still-lasting war.
  KING RICHARD. Tell her the King, that may command,
    entreats.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. That at her hands which the King's
    King forbids.
  KING RICHARD. Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. To wail the title, as her mother doth.
  KING RICHARD. Say I will love her everlastingly.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. But how long shall that title 'ever' last?
  KING RICHARD. Sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. But how long fairly shall her sweet life
    last?
  KING RICHARD. As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. As long as hell and Richard likes of it.
  KING RICHARD. Say I, her sovereign, am her subject low.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. But she, your subject, loathes such
    sovereignty.
  KING RICHARD. Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. An honest tale speeds best being plainly
    told.
  KING RICHARD. Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
  KING RICHARD. Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. O, no, my reasons are too deep and
      dead-
    Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
  KING RICHARD. Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Harp on it still shall I till heartstrings
    break.
  KING RICHARD. Now, by my George, my garter, and my
    crown-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Profan'd, dishonour'd, and the third
    usurp'd.
  KING RICHARD. I swear-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. By nothing; for this is no oath:
    Thy George, profan'd, hath lost his lordly honour;
    Thy garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue;
    Thy crown, usurp'd, disgrac'd his kingly glory.
    If something thou wouldst swear to be believ'd,
    Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.
  KING RICHARD. Then, by my self-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Thy self is self-misus'd.
  KING RICHARD. Now, by the world-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. 'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.
  KING RICHARD. My father's death-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Thy life hath it dishonour'd.
  KING RICHARD. Why, then, by God-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. God's wrong is most of all.
    If thou didst fear to break an oath with Him,
    The unity the King my husband made
    Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.
    If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
    Th' imperial metal, circling now thy head,
    Had grac'd the tender temples of my child;
    And both the Princes had been breathing here,
    Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust,
    Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.
    What canst thou swear by now?
  KING RICHARD. The time to come.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. That thou hast wronged in the time
    o'erpast;
    For I myself have many tears to wash
    Hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee.
    The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughter'd,
    Ungovern'd youth, to wail it in their age;
    The parents live whose children thou hast butcheed,
    Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.
    Swear not by time to come; for that thou hast
    Misus'd ere us'd, by times ill-us'd o'erpast.
  KING RICHARD. As I intend to prosper and repent,
    So thrive I in my dangerous affairs
    Of hostile arms! Myself myself confound!
    Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours!
    Day, yield me not thy light; nor, night, thy rest!
    Be opposite all planets of good luck
    To my proceeding!-if, with dear heart's love,
    Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
    I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter.
    In her consists my happiness and thine;
    Without her, follows to myself and thee,
    Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul,
    Death, desolation, ruin, and decay.
    It cannot be avoided but by this;
    It will not be avoided but by this.
    Therefore, dear mother-I must call you so-
    Be the attorney of my love to her;
    Plead what I will be, not what I have been;
    Not my deserts, but what I will deserve.
    Urge the necessity and state of times,
    And be not peevish-fond in great designs.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
  KING RICHARD. Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Shall I forget myself to be myself?
  KING RICHARD. Ay, if your self's remembrance wrong
    yourself.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Yet thou didst kill my children.
  KING RICHARD. But in your daughter's womb I bury them;
    Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed
    Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
  KING RICHARD. And be a happy mother by the deed.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. I go. Write to me very shortly,
    And you shall understand from me her mind.
  KING RICHARD. Bear her my true love's kiss; and so, farewell.
                               Kissing her. Exit QUEEN ELIZABETH
    Relenting fool, and shallow, changing woman!
Enter RATCLIFF; CATESBY following

    How now! what news?
  RATCLIFF. Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast
    Rideth a puissant navy; to our shores
    Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
    Unarm'd, and unresolv'd to beat them back.
    'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;
    And there they hull, expecting but the aid
    Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
  KING RICHARD. Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of
    Norfolk.
    Ratcliff, thyself-or Catesby; where is he?
  CATESBY. Here, my good lord.
  KING RICHARD. Catesby, fly to the Duke.
  CATESBY. I will my lord, with all convenient haste.
  KING RICHARD. Ratcliff, come hither. Post to Salisbury;
    When thou com'st thither- [To CATESBY] Dull,
    unmindfull villain,
    Why stay'st thou here, and go'st not to the Duke?
  CATESBY. First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness' pleasure,
    What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.
  KING RICHARD. O, true, good Catesby. Bid him levy straight
    The greatest strength and power that he can make
    And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.
  CATESBY. I go. Exit
  RATCLIFF. What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?
  KING RICHARD. Why, what wouldst thou do there before I
    go?
  RATCLIFF. Your Highness told me I should post before.
  KING RICHARD. My mind is chang'd.
Enter LORD STANLEY

  STANLEY, what news with you?
  STANLEY. None good, my liege, to please you with
    the hearing;
    Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
  KING RICHARD. Hoyday, a riddle! neither good nor bad!
    What need'st thou run so many miles about,
    When thou mayest tell thy tale the nearest way?
    Once more, what news?
  STANLEY. Richmond is on the seas.
  KING RICHARD. There let him sink, and be the seas on him!
    White-liver'd runagate, what doth he there?
  STANLEY. I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
  KING RICHARD. Well, as you guess?
  STANLEY. Stirr'd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,
    He makes for England here to claim the crown.
  KING RICHARD. Is the chair empty? Is the sword unsway'd?
    Is the King dead, the empire unpossess'd?
    What heir of York is there alive but we?
    And who is England's King but great York's heir?
    Then tell me what makes he upon the seas.
  STANLEY. Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
  KING RICHARD. Unless for that he comes to be your liege,
    You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
    Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear.
  STANLEY. No, my good lord; therefore mistrust me not.
  KING RICHARD. Where is thy power then, to beat him back?
    Where be thy tenants and thy followers?
    Are they not now upon the western shore,
    Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?
  STANLEY. No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.
  KING RICHARD. Cold friends to me. What do they in the
    north,
    When they should serve their sovereign in the west?
  STANLEY. They have not been commanded, mighty King.
    Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,
    I'll muster up my friends and meet your Grace
    Where and what time your Majesty shall please.
  KING RICHARD. Ay, ay, thou wouldst be gone to join with
    Richmond;
    But I'll not trust thee.
  STANLEY. Most mighty sovereign,
    You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.
    I never was nor never will be false.
  KING RICHARD. Go, then, and muster men. But leave behind
    Your son, George Stanley. Look your heart be firm,
    Or else his head's assurance is but frail.
  STANLEY. So deal with him as I prove true to you. Exit
Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,
    As I by friends am well advertised,
    Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate,
    Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother,
    With many moe confederates, are in arms.
Enter another MESSENGER

  SECOND MESSENGER. In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in
    arms;
    And every hour more competitors
    Flock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.
Enter another MESSENGER

  THIRD MESSENGER. My lord, the army of great Buckingham-
  KING RICHARD. Out on you, owls! Nothing but songs of
    death? [He strikes him]
    There, take thou that till thou bring better news.
  THIRD MESSENGER. The news I have to tell your Majesty
    Is that by sudden floods and fall of waters
    Buckingham's army is dispers'd and scatter'd;
    And he himself wand'red away alone,
    No man knows whither.
  KING RICHARD. I cry thee mercy.
    There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
    Hath any well-advised friend proclaim'd
    Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
  THIRD MESSENGER. Such proclamation hath been made,
    my Lord.
Enter another MESSENGER

  FOURTH MESSENGER. Sir Thomas Lovel and Lord Marquis
    Dorset,
    'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.
    But this good comfort bring I to your Highness-
    The Britaine navy is dispers'd by tempest.
    Richmond in Dorsetshire sent out a boat
    Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks
    If they were his assistants, yea or no;
    Who answer'd him they came from Buckingham
    Upon his party. He, mistrusting them,
    Hois'd sail, and made his course again for Britaine.
  KING RICHARD. March on, march on, since we are up in
    arms;
    If not to fight with foreign enemies,
    Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
Re-enter CATESBY

  CATESBY. My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken-
    That is the best news. That the Earl of Richmond
    Is with a mighty power landed at Milford
    Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
  KING RICHARD. Away towards Salisbury! While we reason
    here
    A royal battle might be won and lost.
    Some one take order Buckingham be brought
    To Salisbury; the rest march on with me.
    Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE 5.
LORD DERBY'S house

Enter STANLEY and SIR CHRISTOPHER URSWICK

  STANLEY. Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
    That in the sty of the most deadly boar
    My son George Stanley is frank'd up in hold;
    If I revolt, off goes young George's head;
    The fear of that holds off my present aid.
    So, get thee gone; commend me to thy lord.
    Withal say that the Queen hath heartily consented
    He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
    But tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
  CHRISTOPHER. At Pembroke, or at Ha'rford west in Wales.
  STANLEY. What men of name resort to him?
  CHRISTOPHER. Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier;
  SIR Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley,
  OXFORD, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
    And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew;
    And many other of great name and worth;
    And towards London do they bend their power,
    If by the way they be not fought withal.
  STANLEY. Well, hie thee to thy lord; I kiss his hand;
    My letter will resolve him of my mind.
    Farewell. Exeunt
ACT V. SCENE 1.
Salisbury. An open place

Enter the SHERIFF and guard, with BUCKINGHAM, led to execution

  BUCKINGHAM. Will not King Richard let me speak with
    him?
  SHERIFF. No, my good lord; therefore be patient.
  BUCKINGHAM. Hastings, and Edward's children, Grey, and
    Rivers,
    Holy King Henry, and thy fair son Edward,
    Vaughan, and all that have miscarried
    By underhand corrupted foul injustice,
    If that your moody discontented souls
    Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
    Even for revenge mock my destruction!
    This is All-Souls' day, fellow, is it not?
  SHERIFF. It is, my lord.
  BUCKINGHAM. Why, then All-Souls' day is my body's
    doomsday.
    This is the day which in King Edward's time
    I wish'd might fall on me when I was found
    False to his children and his wife's allies;
    This is the day wherein I wish'd to fall
    By the false faith of him whom most I trusted;
    This, this All-Souls' day to my fearful soul
    Is the determin'd respite of my wrongs;
    That high All-Seer which I dallied with
    Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head
    And given in earnest what I begg'd in jest.
    Thus doth He force the swords of wicked men
    To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms.
    Thus Margaret's curse falls heavy on my neck.
    'When he' quoth she 'shall split thy heart with sorrow,
    Remember Margaret was a prophetess.'
    Come lead me, officers, to the block of shame;
    Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame. Exeunt
SCENE 2.
Camp near Tamworth

Enter RICHMOND, OXFORD, SIR JAMES BLUNT, SIR WALTER HERBERT, and others, with drum and colours

  RICHMOND. Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
    Bruis'd underneath the yoke of tyranny,
    Thus far into the bowels of the land
    Have we march'd on without impediment;
    And here receive we from our father Stanley
    Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
    The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
    That spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines,
    Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough
    In your embowell'd bosoms-this foul swine
    Is now even in the centre of this isle,
    Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn.
    From Tamworth thither is but one day's march.
    In God's name cheerly on, courageous friends,
    To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
    By this one bloody trial of sharp war.
  OXFORD. Every man's conscience is a thousand men,
    To fight against this guilty homicide.
  HERBERT. I doubt not but his friends will turn to us.
  BLUNT. He hath no friends but what are friends for fear,
    Which in his dearest need will fly from him.
  RICHMOND. All for our vantage. Then in God's name march.
    True hope is swift and flies with swallow's wings;
    Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings. Exeunt
SCENE 3.
Bosworth Field

Enter KING RICHARD in arms, with NORFOLK, RATCLIFF, the EARL of SURREYS and others

  KING RICHARD. Here pitch our tent, even here in Bosworth
    field.
    My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?
  SURREY. My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
  KING RICHARD. My Lord of Norfolk!
  NORFOLK. Here, most gracious liege.
  KING RICHARD. Norfolk, we must have knocks; ha! must we
    not?
  NORFOLK. We must both give and take, my loving lord.
  KING RICHARD. Up With my tent! Here will I lie to-night;
                      [Soldiers begin to set up the KING'S tent]
    But where to-morrow? Well, all's one for that.
    Who hath descried the number of the traitors?
  NORFOLK. Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
  KING RICHARD. Why, our battalia trebles that account;
    Besides, the King's name is a tower of strength,
    Which they upon the adverse faction want.
    Up with the tent! Come, noble gentlemen,
    Let us survey the vantage of the ground.
    Call for some men of sound direction.
    Let's lack no discipline, make no delay;
    For, lords, to-morrow is a busy day. Exeunt
             Enter, on the other side of the field,
          RICHMOND, SIR WILLIAM BRANDON, OXFORD, DORSET,
              and others. Some pitch RICHMOND'S tent
  RICHMOND. The weary sun hath made a golden set,
    And by the bright tract of his fiery car
    Gives token of a goodly day to-morrow.
    Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.
    Give me some ink and paper in my tent.
    I'll draw the form and model of our battle,
    Limit each leader to his several charge,
    And part in just proportion our small power.
    My Lord of Oxford-you, Sir William Brandon-
    And you, Sir Walter Herbert-stay with me.
    The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment;
    Good Captain Blunt, bear my good night to him,
    And by the second hour in the morning
    Desire the Earl to see me in my tent.
    Yet one thing more, good Captain, do for me-
    Where is Lord Stanley quarter'd, do you know?
  BLUNT. Unless I have mista'en his colours much-
    Which well I am assur'd I have not done-
    His regiment lies half a mile at least
    South from the mighty power of the King.
  RICHMOND. If without peril it be possible,
    Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him
    And give him from me this most needful note.
  BLUNT. Upon my life, my lord, I'll undertake it;
    And so, God give you quiet rest to-night!
  RICHMOND. Good night, good Captain Blunt. Come,
    gentlemen,
    Let us consult upon to-morrow's business.
    In to my tent; the dew is raw and cold.
                                   [They withdraw into the tent]
            Enter, to his-tent, KING RICHARD, NORFOLK,
                       RATCLIFF, and CATESBY
  KING RICHARD. What is't o'clock?
  CATESBY. It's supper-time, my lord;
    It's nine o'clock.
  KING RICHARD. I will not sup to-night.
    Give me some ink and paper.
    What, is my beaver easier than it was?
    And all my armour laid into my tent?
  CATESBY. It is, my liege; and all things are in readiness.
  KING RICHARD. Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge;
    Use careful watch, choose trusty sentinels.
  NORFOLK. I go, my lord.
  KING RICHARD. Stir with the lark to-morrow, gentle Norfolk.
  NORFOLK. I warrant you, my lord. Exit
  KING RICHARD. Catesby!
  CATESBY. My lord?
  KING RICHARD. Send out a pursuivant-at-arms
    To Stanley's regiment; bid him bring his power
    Before sunrising, lest his son George fall
    Into the blind cave of eternal night. Exit CATESBY
    Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.
    Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.
    Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.
    Ratcliff!
  RATCLIFF. My lord?
  KING RICHARD. Saw'st thou the melancholy Lord
    Northumberland?
  RATCLIFF. Thomas the Earl of Surrey and himself,
    Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop
    Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.
  KING RICHARD. So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine.
    I have not that alacrity of spirit
    Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have.
    Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?
  RATCLIFF. It is, my lord.
  KING RICHARD. Bid my guard watch; leave me.
  RATCLIFF, about the mid of night come to my tent
    And help to arm me. Leave me, I say.
                                   Exit RATCLIFF. RICHARD sleeps
               Enter DERBY to RICHMOND in his tent;
                        LORDS attending
  DERBY. Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
  RICHMOND. All comfort that the dark night can afford
    Be to thy person, noble father-in-law!
    Tell me, how fares our loving mother?
  DERBY. I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother,
    Who prays continually for Richmond's good.
    So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
    And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
    In brief, for so the season bids us be,
    Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
    And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
    Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
    I, as I may-that which I would I cannot-
    With best advantage will deceive the time
    And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms;
    But on thy side I may not be too forward,
    Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
    Be executed in his father's sight.
    Farewell; the leisure and the fearful time
    Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
    And ample interchange of sweet discourse
    Which so-long-sund'red friends should dwell upon.
    God give us leisure for these rites of love!
    Once more, adieu; be valiant, and speed well!
  RICHMOND. Good lords, conduct him to his regiment.
    I'll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap,
    Lest leaden slumber peise me down to-morrow
    When I should mount with wings of victory.
    Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
                                         Exeunt all but RICHMOND
    O Thou, whose captain I account myself,
    Look on my forces with a gracious eye;
    Put in their hands Thy bruising irons of wrath,
    That they may crush down with a heavy fall
    The usurping helmets of our adversaries!
    Make us Thy ministers of chastisement,
    That we may praise Thee in the victory!
    To Thee I do commend my watchful soul
    Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes.
    Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still! [Sleeps]
            Enter the GHOST Of YOUNG PRINCE EDWARD,
                    son to HENRY THE SIXTH
  GHOST. [To RICHARD] Let me sit heavy on thy soul
    to-morrow!
    Think how thou stabb'dst me in my prime of youth
    At Tewksbury; despair, therefore, and die!
    [To RICHMOND] Be cheerful, Richmond; for the wronged
    souls
    Of butcher'd princes fight in thy behalf.
    King Henry's issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
Enter the GHOST of HENRY THE SIXTH

  GHOST. [To RICHARD] When I was mortal, my anointed
    body
    By thee was punched full of deadly holes.
    Think on the Tower and me. Despair, and die.
    Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die.
    [To RICHMOND] Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror!
    Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be King,
    Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live and flourish!
Enter the GHOST of CLARENCE

  GHOST. [To RICHARD] Let me sit heavy in thy soul
    to-morrow! I that was wash'd to death with fulsome wine,
    Poor Clarence, by thy guile betray'd to death!
    To-morrow in the battle think on me,
    And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair and die!
    [To RICHMOND] Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster,
    The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee.
    Good angels guard thy battle! Live and flourish!
Enter the GHOSTS of RIVERS, GREY, and VAUGHAN

  GHOST OF RIVERS. [To RICHARD] Let me sit heavy in thy
    soul to-morrow,
    Rivers that died at Pomfret! Despair and die!
  GHOST OF GREY. [To RICHARD] Think upon Grey, and let
    thy soul despair!
  GHOST OF VAUGHAN. [To RICHARD] Think upon Vaughan,
    and with guilty fear
    Let fall thy lance. Despair and die!
  ALL. [To RICHMOND] Awake, and think our wrongs in
    Richard's bosom
    Will conquer him. Awake and win the day.
Enter the GHOST of HASTINGS

  GHOST. [To RICHARD] Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,
    And in a bloody battle end thy days!
    Think on Lord Hastings. Despair and die.
    [To RICHMOND] Quiet untroubled soul, awake, awake!
    Arm, fight, and conquer, for fair England's sake!
Enter the GHOSTS of the two young PRINCES

  GHOSTS. [To RICHARD] Dream on thy cousins smothered in
    the Tower.
    Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard,
    And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death!
    Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die.
    [To RICHMOND] Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace, and
    wake in joy;
    Good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy!
    Live, and beget a happy race of kings!
    Edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
Enter the GHOST of LADY ANNE, his wife

  GHOST. [To RICHARD] Richard, thy wife, that wretched
    Anne thy wife
    That never slept a quiet hour with thee
    Now fills thy sleep with perturbations.
    To-morrow in the battle think on me,
    And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair and die.
    [To RICHMOND] Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep;
    Dream of success and happy victory.
    Thy adversary's wife doth pray for thee.
Enter the GHOST of BUCKINGHAM

  GHOST. [To RICHARD] The first was I that help'd thee
    to the crown;
    The last was I that felt thy tyranny.
    O, in the battle think on Buckingham,
    And die in terror of thy guiltiness!
    Dream on, dream on of bloody deeds and death;
    Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath!
    [To RICHMOND] I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid;
    But cheer thy heart and be thou not dismay'd:
    God and good angels fight on Richmond's side;
    And Richard falls in height of all his pride.
            [The GHOSTS vanish. RICHARD starts out of his dream]
  KING RICHARD. Give me another horse. Bind up my wounds.
    Have mercy, Jesu! Soft! I did but dream.
    O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!
    The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight.
    Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
    What do I fear? Myself? There's none else by.
    Richard loves Richard; that is, I am I.
    Is there a murderer here? No-yes, I am.
    Then fly. What, from myself? Great reason why-
    Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself!
    Alack, I love myself. Wherefore? For any good
    That I myself have done unto myself?
    O, no! Alas, I rather hate myself
    For hateful deeds committed by myself!
    I am a villain; yet I lie, I am not.
    Fool, of thyself speak well. Fool, do not flatter.
    My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
    And every tongue brings in a several tale,
    And every tale condemns me for a villain.
    Perjury, perjury, in the high'st degree;
    Murder, stern murder, in the dir'st degree;
    All several sins, all us'd in each degree,
    Throng to the bar, crying all 'Guilty! guilty!'
    I shall despair. There is no creature loves me;
    And if I die no soul will pity me:
    And wherefore should they, since that I myself
    Find in myself no pity to myself?
    Methought the souls of all that I had murder'd
    Came to my tent, and every one did threat
    To-morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard.
Enter RATCLIFF

  RATCLIFF. My lord!
  KING RICHARD. Zounds, who is there?
  RATCLIFF. Ratcliff, my lord; 'tis I. The early village-cock
    Hath twice done salutation to the morn;
    Your friends are up and buckle on their armour.
  KING RICHARD. O Ratcliff, I have dream'd a fearful dream!
    What think'st thou-will our friends prove all true?
  RATCLIFF. No doubt, my lord.
  KING RICHARD. O Ratcliff, I fear, I fear.
  RATCLIFF. Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
  KING RICHARD By the apostle Paul, shadows to-night
    Have stuck more terror to the soul of Richard
    Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
    Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond.
    'Tis not yet near day. Come, go with me;
    Under our tents I'll play the eaves-dropper,
    To see if any mean to shrink from me. Exeunt
Enter the LORDS to RICHMOND sitting in his tent

  LORDS. Good morrow, Richmond!
  RICHMOND. Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,
    That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.
  LORDS. How have you slept, my lord?
  RICHMOND. The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams
    That ever ent'red in a drowsy head
    Have I since your departure had, my lords.
    Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murder'd
    Came to my tent and cried on victory.
    I promise you my soul is very jocund
    In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
    How far into the morning is it, lords?
  LORDS. Upon the stroke of four.
  RICHMOND. Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction.
His ORATION to his SOLDIERS

    More than I have said, loving countrymen,
    The leisure and enforcement of the time
    Forbids to dwell upon; yet remember this:
    God and our good cause fight upon our side;
    The prayers of holy saints and wronged souls,
    Like high-rear'd bulwarks, stand before our faces;
    Richard except, those whom we fight against
    Had rather have us win than him they follow.
    For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen,
    A bloody tyrant and a homicide;
    One rais'd in blood, and one in blood establish'd;
    One that made means to come by what he hath,
    And slaughtered those that were the means to help him;
    A base foul stone, made precious by the foil
    Of England's chair, where he is falsely set;
    One that hath ever been God's enemy.
    Then if you fight against God's enemy,
    God will in justice ward you as his soldiers;
    If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
    You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain;
    If you do fight against your country's foes,
    Your country's foes shall pay your pains the hire;
    If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
    Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors;
    If you do free your children from the sword,
    Your children's children quits it in your age.
    Then, in the name of God and all these rights,
    Advance your standards, draw your willing swords.
    For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
    Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face;
    But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
    The least of you shall share his part thereof.
    Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully;
    God and Saint George! Richmond and victory! Exeunt
           Re-enter KING RICHARD, RATCLIFF, attendants,
                         and forces
  KING RICHARD. What said Northumberland as touching
    Richmond?
  RATCLIFF. That he was never trained up in arms.
  KING RICHARD. He said the truth; and what said Surrey
    then?
  RATCLIFF. He smil'd, and said 'The better for our purpose.'
  KING He was in the right; and so indeed it is.
                                                 [Clock strikes]
    Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar.
    Who saw the sun to-day?
  RATCLIFF. Not I, my lord.
  KING RICHARD. Then he disdains to shine; for by the book
    He should have brav'd the east an hour ago.
    A black day will it be to somebody.
    Ratcliff!
  RATCLIFF. My lord?
  KING RICHARD. The sun will not be seen to-day;
    The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.
    I would these dewy tears were from the ground.
    Not shine to-day! Why, what is that to me
    More than to Richmond? For the selfsame heaven
    That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
Enter NORFOLK

  NORFOLK. Arm, arm, my lord; the foe vaunts in the field.
  KING RICHARD. Come, bustle, bustle; caparison my horse;
    Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power.
    I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,
    And thus my battle shall be ordered:
    My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,
    Consisting equally of horse and foot;
    Our archers shall be placed in the midst.
    John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
    Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.
    They thus directed, we will follow
    In the main battle, whose puissance on either side
    Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.
    This, and Saint George to boot! What think'st thou,
    Norfolk?
  NORFOLK. A good direction, warlike sovereign.
    This found I on my tent this morning.
                                        [He sheweth him a paper]
  KING RICHARD. [Reads]
    'Jockey of Norfolk, be not so bold,
    For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.'
    A thing devised by the enemy.
    Go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge.
    Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls;
    Conscience is but a word that cowards use,
    Devis'd at first to keep the strong in awe.
    Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.
    March on, join bravely, let us to it pell-mell;
    If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.
His ORATION to his ARMY

    What shall I say more than I have inferr'd?
    Remember whom you are to cope withal-
    A sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways,
    A scum of Britaines, and base lackey peasants,
    Whom their o'er-cloyed country vomits forth
    To desperate adventures and assur'd destruction.
    You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest;
    You having lands, and bless'd with beauteous wives,
    They would restrain the one, distain the other.
    And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow,
    Long kept in Britaine at our mother's cost?
    A milk-sop, one that never in his life
    Felt so much cold as over shoes in snow?
    Let's whip these stragglers o'er the seas again;
    Lash hence these over-weening rags of France,
    These famish'd beggars, weary of their lives;
    Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit,
    For want of means, poor rats, had hang'd themselves.
    If we be conquered, let men conquer us,
    And not these bastard Britaines, whom our fathers
    Have in their own land beaten, bobb'd, and thump'd,
    And, in record, left them the heirs of shame.
    Shall these enjoy our lands? lie with our wives,
    Ravish our daughters? [Drum afar off] Hark! I hear their
    drum.
    Fight, gentlemen of England! Fight, bold yeomen!
    Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head!
    Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood;
    Amaze the welkin with your broken staves!
Enter a MESSENGER

    What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?
  MESSENGER. My lord, he doth deny to come.
  KING RICHARD. Off with his son George's head!
  NORFOLK. My lord, the enemy is pass'd the marsh.
    After the battle let George Stanley die.
  KING RICHARD. A thousand hearts are great within my
    bosom.
    Advance our standards, set upon our foes;
    Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,
    Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!
    Upon them! Victory sits on our helms. Exeunt
SCENE 4.
Another part of the field

Alarum; excursions. Enter NORFOLK and forces; to him CATESBY

  CATESBY. Rescue, my Lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
    The King enacts more wonders than a man,
    Daring an opposite to every danger.
    His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
    Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.
    Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost.
Alarums. Enter KING RICHARD

  KING RICHARD. A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!
  CATESBY. Withdraw, my lord! I'll help you to a horse.
  KING RICHARD. Slave, I have set my life upon a cast
    And I Will stand the hazard of the die.
    I think there be six Richmonds in the field;
    Five have I slain to-day instead of him.
    A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse! Exeunt
SCENE 5.
Another part of the field

Alarum. Enter RICHARD and RICHMOND; they fight; RICHARD is slain. Retreat and flourish. Enter RICHMOND, DERBY bearing the crown, with other LORDS

  RICHMOND. God and your arms be prais'd, victorious friends;
    The day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.
  DERBY. Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee!
    Lo, here, this long-usurped royalty
    From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
    Have I pluck'd off, to grace thy brows withal.
    Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
  RICHMOND. Great God of heaven, say Amen to all!
    But, teLL me is young George Stanley living.
  DERBY. He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town,
    Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
  RICHMOND. What men of name are slain on either side?
  DERBY. John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers,
    Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
  RICHMOND. Inter their bodies as becomes their births.
    Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
    That in submission will return to us.
    And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,
    We will unite the white rose and the red.
    Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,
    That long have frown'd upon their emnity!
    What traitor hears me, and says not Amen?
    England hath long been mad, and scarr'd herself;
    The brother blindly shed the brother's blood,
    The father rashly slaughter'd his own son,
    The son, compell'd, been butcher to the sire;
    All this divided York and Lancaster,
    Divided in their dire division,
    O, now let Richmond and Elizabeth,
    The true succeeders of each royal house,
    By God's fair ordinance conjoin together!
    And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so,
    Enrich the time to come with smooth-fac'd peace,
    With smiling plenty, and fair prosperous days!
    Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,
    That would reduce these bloody days again
    And make poor England weep in streams of blood!
    Let them not live to taste this land's increase
    That would with treason wound this fair land's peace!
    Now civil wounds are stopp'd, peace lives again-
    That she may long live here, God say Amen! Exeunt

THE TRAGEDY OF ROMEO AND JULIET
Contents
THE PROLOGUE.

ACT I
Scene I. A public place.
Scene II. A Street.
Scene III. Room in Capulets House.
Scene IV. A Street.
Scene V. A Hall in Capulets House.

ACT II
CHORUS.
Scene I. An open place adjoining Capulets Garden.
Scene II. Capulets Garden.
Scene III. Friar Lawrences Cell.
Scene IV. A Street.
Scene V. Capulets Garden.
Scene VI. Friar Lawrences Cell.

ACT III
Scene I. A public Place.
Scene II. A Room in Capulets House.
Scene III. Friar Lawrences cell.
Scene IV. A Room in Capulets House.
Scene V. An open Gallery to Juliets Chamber, overlooking the Garden.

ACT IV
Scene I. Friar Lawrences Cell.
Scene II. Hall in Capulets House.
Scene III. Juliets Chamber.
Scene IV. Hall in Capulets House.
Scene V. Juliets Chamber; Juliet on the bed.

ACT V
Scene I. Mantua. A Street.
Scene II. Friar Lawrences Cell.
Scene III. A churchyard; in it a Monument belonging to the Capulets.


Dramatis Person
ESCALUS, Prince of Verona.
MERCUTIO, kinsman to the Prince, and friend to Romeo.
PARIS, a young Nobleman, kinsman to the Prince.
Page to Paris.

MONTAGUE, head of a Veronese family at feud with the Capulets.
LADY MONTAGUE, wife to Montague.
ROMEO, son to Montague.
BENVOLIO, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo.
ABRAM, servant to Montague.
BALTHASAR, servant to Romeo.

CAPULET, head of a Veronese family at feud with the Montagues.
LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
JULIET, daughter to Capulet.
TYBALT, nephew to Lady Capulet.
CAPULETS COUSIN, an old man.
NURSE to Juliet.
PETER, servant to Juliets Nurse.
SAMPSON, servant to Capulet.
GREGORY, servant to Capulet.
Servants.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, a Franciscan.
FRIAR JOHN, of the same Order.
An Apothecary.
CHORUS.
Three Musicians.
An Officer.
Citizens of Verona; several Men and Women, relations to both houses; Maskers, Guards, Watchmen and Attendants.

SCENE. During the greater part of the Play in Verona; once, in the Fifth Act, at Mantua.

THE PROLOGUE
Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Two households, both alike in dignity,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-crossd lovers take their life;
Whose misadventurd piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents strife.
The fearful passage of their death-markd love,
And the continuance of their parents rage,
Which, but their childrens end, nought could remove,
Is now the two hours traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.

[Exit.]


ACT I
SCENE I. A public place.
Enter Sampson and Gregory armed with swords and bucklers.

SAMPSON.
Gregory, on my word, well not carry coals.

GREGORY.
No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON.
I mean, if we be in choler, well draw.

GREGORY.
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o the collar.

SAMPSON.
I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMPSON.
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY.
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand: therefore, if thou art moved, thou runnst away.

SAMPSON.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand.
I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montagues.

GREGORY.
That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.

SAMPSON.
True, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push Montagues men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.

GREGORY.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

SAMPSON.
Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I have fought with the men I will be civil with the maids, I will cut off their heads.

GREGORY.
The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON.
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads; take it in what sense thou wilt.

GREGORY.
They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON.
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY.
Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool; here comes of the house of Montagues.

Enter Abram and Balthasar.

SAMPSON.
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.

GREGORY.
How? Turn thy back and run?

SAMPSON.
Fear me not.

GREGORY.
No, marry; I fear thee!

SAMPSON.
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

GREGORY.
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.

SAMPSON.
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is disgrace to them if they bear it.

ABRAM.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON.
I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAM.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON.
Is the law of our side if I say ay?

GREGORY.
No.

SAMPSON.
No sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY.
Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAM.
Quarrel, sir? No, sir.

SAMPSON.
But if you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.

ABRAM.
No better.

SAMPSON.
Well, sir.

Enter Benvolio.

GREGORY.
Say better; here comes one of my masters kinsmen.

SAMPSON.
Yes, better, sir.

ABRAM.
You lie.

SAMPSON.
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy washing blow.

[They fight.]

BENVOLIO.
Part, fools! put up your swords, you know not what you do.

[Beats down their swords.]

Enter Tybalt.

TYBALT.
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee Benvolio, look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO.
I do but keep the peace, put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT.
What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Have at thee, coward.

[They fight.]

Enter three or four Citizens with clubs.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Clubs, bills and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

Enter Capulet in his gown, and Lady Capulet.

CAPULET.
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET.
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?

CAPULET.
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

Enter Montague and his Lady Montague.

MONTAGUE.
Thou villain Capulet! Hold me not, let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE.
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

Enter Prince Escalus, with Attendants.

PRINCE.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,
Will they not hear? What, ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemperd weapons to the ground
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbd the quiet of our streets,
And made Veronas ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Cankerd with peace, to part your cankerd hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away:
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgement-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

[Exeunt Prince and Attendants; Capulet, Lady Capulet, Tybalt, Citizens and Servants.]

MONTAGUE.
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO.
Here were the servants of your adversary
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them, in the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepard,
Which, as he breathd defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head, and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal, hissd him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE.
O where is Romeo, saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO.
Madam, an hour before the worshippd sun
Peerd forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me,
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I, measuring his affections by my own,
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Being one too many by my weary self,
Pursud my humour, not pursuing his,
And gladly shunnd who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh mornings dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Auroras bed,
Away from light steals home my heavy son,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE.
I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO.
Have you importund him by any means?

MONTAGUE.
Both by myself and many other friends;
But he, his own affections counsellor,
Is to himselfI will not say how true
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.

Enter Romeo.

BENVOLIO.
See, where he comes. So please you step aside;
Ill know his grievance or be much denied.

MONTAGUE.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, lets away,

[Exeunt Montague and Lady Montague.]

BENVOLIO.
Good morrow, cousin.

ROMEO.
Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO.
But new struck nine.

ROMEO.
Ay me, sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO.
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeos hours?

ROMEO.
Not having that which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO.
In love?

ROMEO.
Out.

BENVOLIO.
Of love?

ROMEO.
Out of her favour where I am in love.

BENVOLIO.
Alas that love so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof.

ROMEO.
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Heres much to do with hate, but more with love:
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
O anything, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO.
No coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO.
Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO.
At thy good hearts oppression.

ROMEO.
Why such is loves transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it prest
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being purgd, a fire sparkling in lovers eyes;
Being vexd, a sea nourishd with lovers tears:
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.

[Going.]

BENVOLIO.
Soft! I will go along:
And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO.
Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here.
This is not Romeo, hes some other where.

BENVOLIO.
Tell me in sadness who is that you love?

ROMEO.
What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO.
Groan! Why, no; but sadly tell me who.

ROMEO.
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will,
A word ill urgd to one that is so ill.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO.
I aimd so near when I supposd you lovd.

ROMEO.
A right good markman, and shes fair I love.

BENVOLIO.
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO.
Well, in that hit you miss: shell not be hit
With Cupids arrow, she hath Dians wit;
And in strong proof of chastity well armd,
From loves weak childish bow she lives uncharmd.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms
Nor bide thencounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
O shes rich in beauty, only poor
That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO.
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO.
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
For beauty starvd with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise; wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO.
Be ruld by me, forget to think of her.

ROMEO.
O teach me how I should forget to think.

BENVOLIO.
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
Examine other beauties.

ROMEO.
Tis the way
To call hers, exquisite, in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair;
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who passd that passing fair?
Farewell, thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO.
Ill pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE II. A Street.
Enter Capulet, Paris and Servant.

CAPULET.
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike; and tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS.
Of honourable reckoning are you both,
And pity tis you livd at odds so long.
But now my lord, what say you to my suit?

CAPULET.
But saying oer what I have said before.
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET.
And too soon marrd are those so early made.
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent is but a part;
And she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustomd feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love, and you among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well apparelld April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in reckoning none.
Come, go with me. Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there, [gives a paper] and to them say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

[Exeunt Capulet and Paris.]

SERVANT.
Find them out whose names are written here! It is written that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!

Enter Benvolio and Romeo.

BENVOLIO.
Tut, man, one fire burns out anothers burning,
One pain is lessend by anothers anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with anothers languish:
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO.
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO.
For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO.
For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO.
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO.
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is:
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whippd and tormented andGod-den, good fellow.

SERVANT.
God gi go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

ROMEO.
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

SERVANT.
Perhaps you have learned it without book.
But I pray, can you read anything you see?

ROMEO.
Ay, If I know the letters and the language.

SERVANT.
Ye say honestly, rest you merry!

ROMEO.
Stay, fellow; I can read.

[He reads the letter.]

Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
The lady widow of Utruvio;
Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces;
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt;
Lucio and the lively Helena.

A fair assembly. [Gives back the paper] Whither should they come?

SERVANT.
Up.

ROMEO.
Whither to supper?

SERVANT.
To our house.

ROMEO.
Whose house?

SERVANT.
My masters.

ROMEO.
Indeed I should have askd you that before.

SERVANT.
Now Ill tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry.

[Exit.]

BENVOLIO.
At this same ancient feast of Capulets
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovst;
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Go thither and with unattainted eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO.
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire;
And these who, often drownd, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Neer saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poisd with herself in either eye:
But in that crystal scales let there be weighd
Your ladys love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.

ROMEO.
Ill go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE III. Room in Capulets House.
Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.

LADY CAPULET.
Nurse, wheres my daughter? Call her forth to me.

NURSE.
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! What ladybird!
God forbid! Wheres this girl? What, Juliet!

Enter Juliet.

JULIET.
How now, who calls?

NURSE.
Your mother.

JULIET.
Madam, I am here. What is your will?

LADY CAPULET.
This is the matter. Nurse, give leave awhile,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again,
I have rememberd me, thous hear our counsel.
Thou knowest my daughters of a pretty age.

NURSE.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET.
Shes not fourteen.

NURSE.
Ill lay fourteen of my teeth,
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four,
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammas-tide?

LADY CAPULET.
A fortnight and odd days.

NURSE.
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she,God rest all Christian souls!
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was weand,I never shall forget it,
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall;
My lord and you were then at Mantua:
Nay, I do bear a brain. But as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy, and fall out with the dug!
Shake, quoth the dovehouse: twas no need, I trow,
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven years;
For then she could stand alone; nay, by throod
She could have run and waddled all about;
For even the day before she broke her brow,
And then my husband,God be with his soul!
A was a merry man,took up the child:
Yea, quoth he, dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule? and, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch left crying, and said Ay.
To see now how a jest shall come about.
I warrant, and I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it. Wilt thou not, Jule? quoth he;
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said Ay.

LADY CAPULET.
Enough of this; I pray thee hold thy peace.

NURSE.
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh,
To think it should leave crying, and say Ay;
And yet I warrant it had upon it brow
A bump as big as a young cockerels stone;
A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.
Yea, quoth my husband, fallst upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule? it stinted, and said Ay.

JULIET.
And stint thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.

NURSE.
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace
Thou wast the prettiest babe that eer I nursd:
And I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET.
Marry, that marry is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET.
It is an honour that I dream not of.

NURSE.
An honour! Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst suckd wisdom from thy teat.

LADY CAPULET.
Well, think of marriage now: younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief;
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

NURSE.
A man, young lady! Lady, such a man
As all the worldwhy hes a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET.
Veronas summer hath not such a flower.

NURSE.
Nay, hes a flower, in faith a very flower.

LADY CAPULET.
What say you, can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
Read oer the volume of young Paris face,
And find delight writ there with beautys pen.
Examine every married lineament,
And see how one another lends content;
And what obscurd in this fair volume lies,
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea; and tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in manys eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less.

NURSE.
No less, nay bigger. Women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET.
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris love?

JULIET.
Ill look to like, if looking liking move:
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the Nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in extremity. I must hence to wait, I beseech you follow straight.

LADY CAPULET.
We follow thee.

[Exit Servant.]

Juliet, the County stays.

NURSE.
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE IV. A Street.
Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six Maskers; Torch-bearers and others.

ROMEO.
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?

BENVOLIO.
The date is out of such prolixity:
Well have no Cupid hoodwinkd with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartars painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance:
But let them measure us by what they will,
Well measure them a measure, and be gone.

ROMEO.
Give me a torch, I am not for this ambling;
Being but heavy I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO.
Not I, believe me, you have dancing shoes,
With nimble soles, I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO.
You are a lover, borrow Cupids wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO.
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Under loves heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO.
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO.
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous; and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in: [Putting on a mask.]
A visor for a visor. What care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Here are the beetle-brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO.
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO.
A torch for me: let wantons, light of heart,
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
For I am proverbd with a grandsire phrase,
Ill be a candle-holder and look on,
The game was neer so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO.
Tut, duns the mouse, the constables own word:
If thou art dun, well draw thee from the mire
Or save your reverence love, wherein thou stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho.

ROMEO.
Nay, thats not so.

MERCUTIO.
I mean sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, light lights by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO.
And we mean well in going to this mask;
But tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO.
Why, may one ask?

ROMEO.
I dreamt a dream tonight.

MERCUTIO.
And so did I.

ROMEO.
Well what was yours?

MERCUTIO.
That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO.
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO.
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Over mens noses as they lie asleep:
Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners legs;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Her traces, of the smallest spiders web;
The collars, of the moonshines watery beams;
Her whip of crickets bone; the lash, of film;
Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Prickd from the lazy finger of a maid:
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o mind the fairies coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers brains, and then they dream of love;
Oer courtiers knees, that dream on curtsies straight;
Oer lawyers fingers, who straight dream on fees;
Oer ladies lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Sometime she gallops oer a courtiers nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pigs tail,
Tickling a parsons nose as a lies asleep,
Then dreams he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth oer a soldiers neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscados, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes;
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two,
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night;
And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which, once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them, and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she,

ROMEO.
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace,
Thou talkst of nothing.

MERCUTIO.
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
And, being angerd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO.
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves:
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO.
I fear too early: for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars,
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this nights revels; and expire the term
Of a despised life, closd in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my suit. On, lusty gentlemen!

BENVOLIO.
Strike, drum.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE V. A Hall in Capulets House.
Musicians waiting. Enter Servants.

FIRST SERVANT.
Wheres Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
He shift a trencher! He scrape a trencher!

SECOND SERVANT.
When good manners shall lie all in one or two mens hands, and they unwashd too, tis a foul thing.

FIRST SERVANT.
Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane; and as thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony and Potpan!

SECOND SERVANT.
Ay, boy, ready.

FIRST SERVANT.
You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.

SECOND SERVANT.
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys. Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.

[Exeunt.]

Enter Capulet, &c. with the Guests and Gentlewomen to the Maskers.

CAPULET.
Welcome, gentlemen, ladies that have their toes
Unplagud with corns will have a bout with you.
Ah my mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She Ill swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor, and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair ladys ear,
Such as would please; tis gone, tis gone, tis gone,
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall, give room! And foot it, girls.

[Music plays, and they dance.]

More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah sirrah, this unlookd-for sport comes well.
Nay sit, nay sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days;
How long ist now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

CAPULETS COUSIN.
Byr Lady, thirty years.

CAPULET.
What, man, tis not so much, tis not so much:
Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years; and then we maskd.

CAPULETS COUSIN.
Tis more, tis more, his son is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.

CAPULET.
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO.
What lady is that, which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?

SERVANT.
I know not, sir.

ROMEO.
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiops ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
As yonder lady oer her fellows shows.
The measure done, Ill watch her place of stand,
And touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
For I neer saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT.
This by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What, dares the slave
Come hither, coverd with an antic face,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET.
Why how now, kinsman!
Wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT.
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
A villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET.
Young Romeo, is it?

TYBALT.
Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET.
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,
A bears him like a portly gentleman;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-governd youth.
I would not for the wealth of all the town
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient, take no note of him,
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT.
It fits when such a villain is a guest:
Ill not endure him.

CAPULET.
He shall be endurd.
What, goodman boy! I say he shall, go to;
Am I the master here, or you? Go to.
Youll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,
Youll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop, youll be the man!

TYBALT.
Why, uncle, tis a shame.

CAPULET.
Go to, go to!
You are a saucy boy. Ist so, indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what.
You must contrary me! Marry, tis time.
Well said, my hearts!You are a princox; go:
Be quiet, orMore light, more light!For shame!
Ill make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts.

TYBALT.
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall.

[Exit.]

ROMEO.
[To Juliet.] If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this,
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

JULIET.
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers kiss.

ROMEO.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET.
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO.
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do:
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers sake.

ROMEO.
Then move not while my prayers effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purgd.
[Kissing her.]

JULIET.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

ROMEO.
Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urgd!
Give me my sin again.

JULIET.
You kiss by the book.

NURSE.
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

ROMEO.
What is her mother?

NURSE.
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nursd her daughter that you talkd withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.

ROMEO.
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foes debt.

BENVOLIO.
Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.

ROMEO.
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.

CAPULET.
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone,
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it een so? Why then, I thank you all;
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
More torches here! Come on then, lets to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late,
Ill to my rest.

[Exeunt all but Juliet and Nurse.]

JULIET.
Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?

NURSE.
The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET.
Whats he that now is going out of door?

NURSE.
Marry, that I think be young Petruchio.

JULIET.
Whats he that follows here, that would not dance?

NURSE.
I know not.

JULIET.
Go ask his name. If he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

NURSE.
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET.
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed enemy.

NURSE.
Whats this? Whats this?

JULIET.
A rhyme I learnd even now
Of one I dancd withal.

[One calls within, Juliet.]

NURSE.
Anon, anon!
Come lets away, the strangers all are gone.

[Exeunt.]


ACT II
Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
That fair for which love groand for and would die,
With tender Juliet matchd, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is belovd, and loves again,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
But to his foe supposd he must complain,
And she steal loves sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new beloved anywhere.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.

[Exit.]


SCENE I. An open place adjoining Capulets Garden.
Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

[He climbs the wall and leaps down within it.]

Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.

BENVOLIO.
Romeo! My cousin Romeo! Romeo!

MERCUTIO.
He is wise,
And on my life hath stoln him home to bed.

BENVOLIO.
He ran this way, and leapd this orchard wall:
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, Ill conjure too.
Romeo! Humours! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh,
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but Ah me! Pronounce but Love and dove;
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua lovd the beggar-maid.
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosalines bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.

BENVOLIO.
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO.
This cannot anger him. Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress circle,
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it, and conjurd it down;
That were some spite. My invocation
Is fair and honest, and, in his mistress name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO.
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love, and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
O Romeo, that she were, O that she were
An open-arse and thou a poperin pear!
Romeo, good night. Ill to my truckle-bed.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO.
Go then; for tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE II. Capulets Garden.
Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

Juliet appears above at a window.

But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun!
Arise fair sun and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
It is my lady, O it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses, I will answer it.
I am too bold, tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek.

JULIET.
Ay me.

ROMEO.
She speaks.
O speak again bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being oer my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET.
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name.
Or if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And Ill no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO.
[Aside.] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?

JULIET.
Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Whats Montague? It is nor hand nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O be some other name.
Whats in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo calld,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.

ROMEO.
I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and Ill be new baptisd;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET.
What man art thou that, thus bescreend in night
So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO.
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET.
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongues utterance, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

ROMEO.
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.

JULIET.
How camst thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO.
With loves light wings did I oerperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt:
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.

JULIET.
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO.
I have nights cloak to hide me from their eyes,
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET.
By whose direction foundst thou out this place?

ROMEO.
By love, that first did prompt me to enquire;
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet wert thou as far
As that vast shore washd with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET.
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say Ay,
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swearst,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers perjuries,
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
Ill frown and be perverse, and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo. But else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond;
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light:
But trust me, gentleman, Ill prove more true
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheardst, ere I was ware,
My true-love passion; therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO.
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops,

JULIET.
O swear not by the moon, thinconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO.
What shall I swear by?

JULIET.
Do not swear at all.
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And Ill believe thee.

ROMEO.
If my hearts dear love,

JULIET.
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract tonight;
It is too rash, too unadvisd, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say It lightens. Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, by summers ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.

ROMEO.
O wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET.
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?

ROMEO.
Thexchange of thy loves faithful vow for mine.

JULIET.
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?

JULIET.
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have;
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.
[Nurse calls within.]
Anon, good Nurse!Sweet Montague be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.

[Exit.]

ROMEO.
O blessed, blessed night. I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

Enter Juliet above.

JULIET.
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that Ill procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot Ill lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

NURSE.
[Within.] Madam.

JULIET.
I come, anon. But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee,

NURSE.
[Within.] Madam.

JULIET.
By and by I come
To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.

ROMEO.
So thrive my soul,

JULIET.
A thousand times good night.

[Exit.]

ROMEO.
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books,
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks.

[Retiring slowly.]

Re-enter Juliet, above.

JULIET.
Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconers voice
To lure this tassel-gentle back again.
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of my Romeos name.

ROMEO.
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears.

JULIET.
Romeo.

ROMEO.
My nyas?

JULIET.
What oclock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO.
By the hour of nine.

JULIET.
I will not fail. Tis twenty years till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET.
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.

ROMEO.
And Ill still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET.
Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone,
And yet no farther than a wantons bird,
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO.
I would I were thy bird.

JULIET.
Sweet, so would I:
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet sorrow
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

[Exit.]

ROMEO.
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest.
The grey-eyd morn smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light;
And darkness fleckled like a drunkard reels
From forth days pathway, made by Titans wheels
Hence will I to my ghostly Sires cell,
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.

[Exit.]


SCENE III. Friar Lawrences Cell.
Enter Friar Lawrence with a basket.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer, and nights dank dew to dry,
I must upfill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth thats natures mother, is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb:
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find.
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, straind from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice being misapplied,
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Enter Romeo.

Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence, and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs,grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO.
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distemperd head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old mans eye,
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuffd brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art uprousd with some distemperature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.

ROMEO.
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
God pardon sin. Wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO.
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
I have forgot that name, and that names woe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Thats my good son. But where hast thou been then?

ROMEO.
Ill tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
Thats by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
I bear no hatred, blessed man; for lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO.
Then plainly know my hearts dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combind, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
We met, we wood, and made exchange of vow,
Ill tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young mens love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
To season love, that of it doth not taste.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ring in mine ancient ears.
Lo here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washd off yet.
If ere thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline,
And art thou changd? Pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when theres no strength in men.

ROMEO.
Thou chiddst me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO.
And badst me bury love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Not in a grave
To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO.
I pray thee chide me not, her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come young waverer, come go with me,
In one respect Ill thy assistant be;
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your households rancour to pure love.

ROMEO.
O let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE IV. A Street.
Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.

MERCUTIO.
Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home tonight?

BENVOLIO.
Not to his fathers; I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO.
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline, torments him so that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO.
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet, hath sent a letter to his fathers house.

MERCUTIO.
A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO.
Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO.
Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO.
Nay, he will answer the letters master, how he dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO.
Alas poor Romeo, he is already dead, stabbed with a white wenchs black eye; run through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boys butt-shaft. And is he a man to encounter Tybalt?

BENVOLIO.
Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO.
More than Prince of cats. O, hes the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion. He rests his minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hay.

BENVOLIO.
The what?

MERCUTIO.
The pox of such antic lisping, affecting phantasies; these new tuners of accent. By Jesu, a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good whore. Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardon-mes, who stand so much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? O their bones, their bones!

Enter Romeo.

BENVOLIO.
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo!

MERCUTIO.
Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench,marry, she had a better love to berhyme her: Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gypsy; Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bonjour! Theres a French salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.

ROMEO.
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?

MERCUTIO.
The slip sir, the slip; can you not conceive?

ROMEO.
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.

MERCUTIO.
Thats as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.

ROMEO.
Meaning, to curtsy.

MERCUTIO.
Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO.
A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO.
Pink for flower.

MERCUTIO.
Right.

ROMEO.
Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO.
Sure wit, follow me this jest now, till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing, solely singular.

ROMEO.
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness!

MERCUTIO.
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.

ROMEO.
Swits and spurs, swits and spurs; or Ill cry a match.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done. For thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits, than I am sure, I have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO.
Thou wast never with me for anything, when thou wast not there for the goose.

MERCUTIO.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO.
Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO.
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting, it is a most sharp sauce.

ROMEO.
And is it not then well served in to a sweet goose?

MERCUTIO.
O heres a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad.

ROMEO.
I stretch it out for that word broad, which added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.

MERCUTIO.
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; not art thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a great natural, that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO.
Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO.
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

BENVOLIO.
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

MERCUTIO.
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short, for I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer.

Enter Nurse and Peter.

ROMEO.
Heres goodly gear!
A sail, a sail!

MERCUTIO.
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.

NURSE.
Peter!

PETER.
Anon.

NURSE.
My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO.
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fans the fairer face.

NURSE.
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO.
God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.

NURSE.
Is it good-den?

MERCUTIO.
Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.

NURSE.
Out upon you! What a man are you?

ROMEO.
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.

NURSE.
By my troth, it is well said; for himself to mar, quoth a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO.
I can tell you: but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.

NURSE.
You say well.

MERCUTIO.
Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, ifaith; wisely, wisely.

NURSE.
If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.

BENVOLIO.
She will endite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!

ROMEO.
What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO.
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
[Sings.]
    An old hare hoar,
    And an old hare hoar,
  Is very good meat in Lent;
    But a hare that is hoar
    Is too much for a score
  When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your fathers? Well to dinner thither.

ROMEO.
I will follow you.

MERCUTIO.
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell, lady, lady, lady.

[Exeunt Mercutio and Benvolio.]

NURSE.
I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery?

ROMEO.
A gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.

NURSE.
And a speak anything against me, Ill take him down, and a were lustier than he is, and twenty such Jacks. And if I cannot, Ill find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates.And thou must stand by too and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!

PETER.
I saw no man use you at his pleasure; if I had, my weapon should quickly have been out. I warrant you, I dare draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side.

NURSE.
Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy knave. Pray you, sir, a word: and as I told you, my young lady bid me enquire you out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself. But first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her in a fools paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young. And therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.

ROMEO.
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee,

NURSE.
Good heart, and ifaith I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

ROMEO.
What wilt thou tell her, Nurse? Thou dost not mark me.

NURSE.
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO.
Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence cell
Be shrivd and married. Here is for thy pains.

NURSE.
No truly, sir; not a penny.

ROMEO.
Go to; I say you shall.

NURSE.
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.

ROMEO.
And stay, good Nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee,
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell, be trusty, and Ill quit thy pains;
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.

NURSE.
Now God in heaven bless thee. Hark you, sir.

ROMEO.
What sayst thou, my dear Nurse?

NURSE.
Is your man secret? Did you neer hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?

ROMEO.
I warrant thee my mans as true as steel.

NURSE.
Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord! When twas a little prating thing,O, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man, but Ill warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO.
Ay, Nurse; what of that? Both with an R.

NURSE.
Ah, mocker! Thats the dogs name. R is for theno, I know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.

ROMEO.
Commend me to thy lady.

NURSE.
Ay, a thousand times. Peter!

[Exit Romeo.]

PETER.
Anon.

NURSE.
Before and apace.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE V. Capulets Garden.
Enter Juliet.

JULIET.
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse,
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him. Thats not so.
O, she is lame. Loves heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the suns beams,
Driving back shadows over lowering hills:
Therefore do nimble-piniond doves draw love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this days journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Shed be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Enter Nurse and Peter.

O God, she comes. O honey Nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

NURSE.
Peter, stay at the gate.

[Exit Peter.]

JULIET.
Now, good sweet Nurse,O Lord, why lookst thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou shamst the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

NURSE.
I am aweary, give me leave awhile;
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I had!

JULIET.
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
Nay come, I pray thee speak; good, good Nurse, speak.

NURSE.
Jesu, what haste? Can you not stay a while? Do you not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET.
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that;
Say either, and Ill stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied, ist good or bad?

NURSE.
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than any mans, yet his leg excels all mens, and for a hand and a foot, and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but Ill warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench, serve God. What, have you dined at home?

JULIET.
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?

NURSE.
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o tother side,O my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jauncing up and down.

JULIET.
Ifaith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?

NURSE.
Your love says like an honest gentleman,
And a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome,
And I warrant a virtuous,Where is your mother?

JULIET.
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest.
Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?

NURSE.
O Gods lady dear,
Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET.
Heres such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?

NURSE.
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?

JULIET.
I have.

NURSE.
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence cell;
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
Theyll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder by the which your love
Must climb a birds nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. Ill to dinner; hie you to the cell.

JULIET.
Hie to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE VI. Friar Lawrences Cell.
Enter Friar Lawrence and Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
So smile the heavens upon this holy act
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.

ROMEO.
Amen, amen, but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph die; like fire and powder,
Which as they kiss consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness,
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Enter Juliet.

Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Will neer wear out the everlasting flint.
A lover may bestride the gossamers
That idles in the wanton summer air
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.

JULIET.
Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET.
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO.
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heapd like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich musics tongue
Unfold the imagind happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET.
Conceit more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
But my true love is grown to such excess,
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till holy church incorporate two in one.

[Exeunt.]


ACT III
SCENE I. A public Place.
Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, Page and Servants.

BENVOLIO.
I pray thee, good Mercutio, lets retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
For now these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO.
Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table, and says God send me no need of thee! and by the operation of the second cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.

BENVOLIO.
Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO.
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO.
And what to?

MERCUTIO.
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou? Why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? with another for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarrelling!

BENVOLIO.
And I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO.
The fee simple! O simple!

Enter Tybalt and others.

BENVOLIO.
By my head, here comes the Capulets.

MERCUTIO.
By my heel, I care not.

TYBALT.
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, good-den: a word with one of you.

MERCUTIO.
And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.

TYBALT.
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, and you will give me occasion.

MERCUTIO.
Could you not take some occasion without giving?

TYBALT.
Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.

MERCUTIO.
Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? And thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Heres my fiddlestick, heres that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO.
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO.
Mens eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no mans pleasure, I.

Enter Romeo.

TYBALT.
Well, peace be with you, sir, here comes my man.

MERCUTIO.
But Ill be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, hell be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him man.

TYBALT.
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: Thou art a villain.

ROMEO.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou knowst me not.

TYBALT.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO.
I do protest I never injurd thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.

MERCUTIO.
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
[Draws.] Alla stoccata carries it away.
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?

TYBALT.
What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO.
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.

TYBALT.
[Drawing.] I am for you.

ROMEO.
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO.
Come, sir, your passado.

[They fight.]

ROMEO.
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage,
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!

[Exeunt Tybalt with his Partizans.]

MERCUTIO.
I am hurt.
A plague o both your houses. I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO.
What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO.
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, tis enough.
Where is my page? Go villain, fetch a surgeon.

[Exit Page.]

ROMEO.
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO.
No, tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door, but tis enough, twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o both your houses. Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death. A braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic!Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.

ROMEO.
I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o both your houses.
They have made worms meat of me.
I have it, and soundly too. Your houses!

[Exeunt Mercutio and Benvolio.]

ROMEO.
This gentleman, the Princes near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation staind
With Tybalts slander,Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin. O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper softend valours steel.

Re-enter Benvolio.

BENVOLIO.
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutios dead,
That gallant spirit hath aspird the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO.
This days black fate on mo days doth depend;
This but begins the woe others must end.

Re-enter Tybalt.

BENVOLIO.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO.
Again in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Away to heaven respective lenity,
And fire-eyd fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again
That late thou gavst me, for Mercutios soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT.
Thou wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO.
This shall determine that.

[They fight; Tybalt falls.]

BENVOLIO.
Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazd. The Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!

ROMEO.
O, I am fortunes fool!

BENVOLIO.
Why dost thou stay?

[Exit Romeo.]

Enter Citizens.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Which way ran he that killd Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO.
There lies that Tybalt.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Up, sir, go with me.
I charge thee in the Princes name obey.

Enter Prince, attended; Montague, Capulet, their Wives and others.

PRINCE.
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO.
O noble Prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET.
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brothers child!
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spilld
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin.

PRINCE.
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO.
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeos hand did slay;
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urgd withal
Your high displeasure. All this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowd
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutios breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
Hold, friends! Friends, part! and swifter than his tongue,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertaind revenge,
And tot they go like lightning; for, ere I
Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain;
And as he fell did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET.
He is a kinsman to the Montague.
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

PRINCE.
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE.
Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutios friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE.
And for that offence
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I have an interest in your hates proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But Ill amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE II. A Room in Capulets House.
Enter Juliet.

JULIET.
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus lodging. Such a waggoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaways eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalkd of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties: or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Playd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood my unmannd blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle, till strange love, grow bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night, come Romeo; come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a ravens back.
Come gentle night, come loving black-browd night,
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night,
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possessd it; and though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyd. So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them. O, here comes my Nurse,
And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks
But Romeos name speaks heavenly eloquence.

Enter Nurse, with cords.

Now, Nurse, what news? What hast thou there?
The cords that Romeo bid thee fetch?

NURSE.
Ay, ay, the cords.

[Throws them down.]

JULIET.
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?

NURSE.
Ah, well-a-day, hes dead, hes dead, hes dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, hes gone, hes killd, hes dead.

JULIET.
Can heaven be so envious?

NURSE.
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo.
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET.
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roard in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but Ay,
And that bare vowel I shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
I am not I if there be such an I;
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer Ay.
If he be slain, say Ay; or if not, No.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

NURSE.
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
God save the mark!here on his manly breast.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubd in blood,
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.

JULIET.
O, break, my heart. Poor bankrout, break at once.
To prison, eyes; neer look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.

NURSE.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had.
O courteous Tybalt, honest gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead.

JULIET.
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughterd and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then dreadful trumpet sound the general doom,
For who is living, if those two are gone?

NURSE.
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished,
Romeo that killd him, he is banished.

JULIET.
O God! Did Romeos hand shed Tybalts blood?

NURSE.
It did, it did; alas the day, it did.

JULIET.
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical,
Dove-featherd raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seemst,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace.

NURSE.
Theres no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men. All perjurd,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, wheres my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo.

JULIET.
Blisterd be thy tongue
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his brow shame is ashamd to sit;
For tis a throne where honour may be crownd
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

NURSE.
Will you speak well of him that killd your cousin?

JULIET.
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I thy three-hours wife have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have killd my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring,
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you mistaking offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,
And Tybalts dead, that would have slain my husband.
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalts death,
That murderd me. I would forget it fain,
But O, it presses to my memory
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners minds.
Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banished.
That banished, that one word banished,
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalts death
Was woe enough, if it had ended there.
Or if sour woe delights in fellowship,
And needly will be rankd with other griefs,
Why followd not, when she said Tybalts dead,
Thy father or thy mother, nay or both,
Which modern lamentation might have movd?
But with a rear-ward following Tybalts death,
Romeo is banishedto speak that word
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. Romeo is banished,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that words death, no words can that woe sound.
Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?

NURSE.
Weeping and wailing over Tybalts corse.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET.
Wash they his wounds with tears. Mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeos banishment.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguild,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exild.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come cords, come Nurse, Ill to my wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead.

NURSE.
Hie to your chamber. Ill find Romeo
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
Ill to him, he is hid at Lawrence cell.

JULIET.
O find him, give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE III. Friar Lawrences cell.
Enter Friar Lawrence.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enanmourd of thy parts
And thou art wedded to calamity.

Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
Father, what news? What is the Princes doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I bring thee tidings of the Princes doom.

ROMEO.
What less than doomsday is the Princes doom?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
A gentler judgment vanishd from his lips,
Not bodys death, but bodys banishment.

ROMEO.
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say death;
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO.
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence banished is banishd from the world,
And worlds exile is death. Then banished
Is death mistermd. Calling death banished,
Thou cuttst my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind Prince,
Taking thy part, hath brushd aside the law,
And turnd that black word death to banishment.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

ROMEO.
Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog,
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliets hand,
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.
But Romeo may not, he is banished.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly.
They are free men but I am banished.
And sayst thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mixd, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though neer so mean,
But banished to kill me? Banished?
O Friar, the damned use that word in hell.
Howlings attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend professd,
To mangle me with that word banished?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Thou fond mad man, hear me speak a little,

ROMEO.
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Ill give thee armour to keep off that word,
Adversitys sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO.
Yet banished? Hang up philosophy.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a Princes doom,
It helps not, it prevails not, talk no more.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O, then I see that mad men have no ears.

ROMEO.
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

[Knocking within.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO.
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.

[Knocking.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hark, how they knock!Whos there?Romeo, arise,
Thou wilt be taken.Stay awhile.Stand up.

[Knocking.]

Run to my study.By-and-by.Gods will,
What simpleness is this.I come, I come.

[Knocking.]

Who knocks so hard? Whence come you, whats your will?

NURSE.
[Within.] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
I come from Lady Juliet.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Welcome then.

Enter Nurse.

NURSE.
O holy Friar, O, tell me, holy Friar,
Where is my ladys lord, wheres Romeo?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

NURSE.
O, he is even in my mistress case.
Just in her case! O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament. Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man.
For Juliets sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO.
Nurse.

NURSE.
Ah sir, ah sir, deaths the end of all.

ROMEO.
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murderer,
Now I have staind the childhood of our joy
With blood removd but little from her own?
Where is she? And how doth she? And what says
My conceald lady to our cancelld love?

NURSE.
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

ROMEO.
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that names cursed hand
Murderd her kinsman. O, tell me, Friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.

[Drawing his sword.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold thy desperate hand.
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazd me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temperd.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
And slay thy lady, that in thy life lives,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why railst thou on thy birth, the heaven and earth?
Since birth, and heaven and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou shamst thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which, like a usurer, aboundst in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vowd to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldiers flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismemberd with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man. Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slewst Tybalt; there art thou happy.
The law that threatend death becomes thy friend,
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But like a misshaped and sullen wench,
Thou puttst up thy Fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou wentst forth in lamentation.
Go before, Nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.

NURSE.
O Lord, I could have stayd here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
My lord, Ill tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

NURSE.
Here sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

[Exit.]

ROMEO.
How well my comfort is revivd by this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Go hence, good night, and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguisd from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. Ill find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand; tis late; farewell; good night.

ROMEO.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE IV. A Room in Capulets House.
Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet and Paris.

CAPULET.
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she lovd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
Tis very late; shell not come down tonight.
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been abed an hour ago.

PARIS.
These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.

LADY CAPULET.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow;
Tonight shes mewd up to her heaviness.

CAPULET.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my childs love. I think she will be ruld
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Acquaint her here of my son Paris love,
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next,
But, soft, what day is this?

PARIS.
Monday, my lord.

CAPULET.
Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
A Thursday let it be; a Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
Well keep no great ado,a friend or two,
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore well have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS.
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.

CAPULET.
Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Farewell, my lord.Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me, it is so very very late that we
May call it early by and by. Good night.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE V. An open Gallery to Juliets Chamber, overlooking the Garden.
Enter Romeo and Juliet.

JULIET.
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That piercd the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO.
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
Nights candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET.
Yond light is not daylight, I know it, I.
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet, thou needst not to be gone.

ROMEO.
Let me be taen, let me be put to death,
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
Ill say yon grey is not the mornings eye,
Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthias brow.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
Come, death, and welcome. Juliet wills it so.
How ist, my soul? Lets talk. It is not day.

JULIET.
It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away.
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes.
O, now I would they had changd voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunts-up to the day.
O now be gone, more light and light it grows.

ROMEO.
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.

Enter Nurse.

NURSE.
Madam.

JULIET.
Nurse?

NURSE.
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke, be wary, look about.

[Exit.]

JULIET.
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO.
Farewell, farewell, one kiss, and Ill descend.

[Descends.]

JULIET.
Art thou gone so? Love, lord, ay husband, friend,
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo.

ROMEO.
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET.
O thinkest thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO.
I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

JULIET.
O God! I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou lookst pale.

ROMEO.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.

[Exit below.]

JULIET.
O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle,
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renownd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune;
For then, I hope thou wilt not keep him long
But send him back.

LADY CAPULET.
[Within.] Ho, daughter, are you up?

JULIET.
Who ist that calls? Is it my lady mother?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustomd cause procures her hither?

Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET.
Why, how now, Juliet?

JULIET.
Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET.
Evermore weeping for your cousins death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
And if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done: some grief shows much of love,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.

JULIET.
Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET.
Well, girl, thou weepst not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughterd him.

JULIET.
What villain, madam?

LADY CAPULET.
That same villain Romeo.

JULIET.
Villain and he be many miles asunder.
God pardon him. I do, with all my heart.
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

LADY CAPULET.
That is because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET.
Ay madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might venge my cousins death.

LADY CAPULET.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. Ill send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banishd runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomd dram
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET.
Indeed I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold himdead
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vexd.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him namd, and cannot come to him,
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that hath slaughterd him.

LADY CAPULET.
Find thou the means, and Ill find such a man.
But now Ill tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET.
And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

LADY CAPULET.
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
One who to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expects not, nor I lookd not for.

JULIET.
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?

LADY CAPULET.
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peters Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET.
Now by Saint Peters Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed.

LADY CAPULET.
Here comes your father, tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

Enter Capulet and Nurse.

CAPULET.
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of my brothers son
It rains downright.
How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood, the winds, thy sighs,
Who raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Have you deliverd to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET.
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.

CAPULET.
Soft. Take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

JULIET.
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

CAPULET.
How now, how now, choppd logic? What is this?
Proud, and, I thank you, and I thank you not;
And yet not proud. Mistress minion you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peters Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!

LADY CAPULET.
Fie, fie! What, are you mad?

JULIET.
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET.
Hang thee young baggage, disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what,get thee to church a Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me.
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child;
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.

NURSE.
God in heaven bless her.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET.
And why, my lady wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.

NURSE.
I speak no treason.

CAPULET.
O God ye good-en!

NURSE.
May not one speak?

CAPULET.
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity oer a gossips bowl,
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET.
You are too hot.

CAPULET.
Gods bread, it makes me mad!
Day, night, hour, ride, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her matchd, and having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly allied,
Stuffd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Proportiond as ones thought would wish a man,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortunes tender,
To answer, Ill not wed, I cannot love,
I am too young, I pray you pardon me.
But, and you will not wed, Ill pardon you.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look tot, think ont, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise.
And you be mine, Ill give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For by my soul, Ill neer acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust tot, bethink you, Ill not be forsworn.

[Exit.]

JULIET.
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O sweet my mother, cast me not away,
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET.
Talk not to me, for Ill not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.

[Exit.]

JULIET.
O God! O Nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself.
What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, Nurse.

NURSE.
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banished; and all the world to nothing
That he dares neer come back to challenge you.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County.
O, hes a lovely gentleman.
Romeos a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead, or twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.

JULIET.
Speakest thou from thy heart?

NURSE.
And from my soul too,
Or else beshrew them both.

JULIET.
Amen.

NURSE.
What?

JULIET.
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in, and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeasd my father, to Lawrence cell,
To make confession and to be absolvd.

NURSE.
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.

[Exit.]

JULIET.
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praisd him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Ill to the Friar to know his remedy.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.

[Exit.]


ACT IV
SCENE I. Friar Lawrences Cell.
Enter Friar Lawrence and Paris.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

PARIS.
My father Capulet will have it so;
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
You say you do not know the ladys mind.
Uneven is the course; I like it not.

PARIS.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalts death,
And therefore have I little talkd of love;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway;
And in his wisdom, hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
[Aside.] I would I knew not why it should be slowd.
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

Enter Juliet.

PARIS.
Happily met, my lady and my wife!

JULIET.
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS.
That may be, must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET.
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Thats a certain text.

PARIS.
Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET.
To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS.
Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET.
I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS.
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET.
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back than to your face.

PARIS.
Poor soul, thy face is much abusd with tears.

JULIET.
The tears have got small victory by that;
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS.
Thou wrongst it more than tears with that report.

JULIET.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slanderd it.

JULIET.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS.
God shield I should disturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye,
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.

[Exit.]

JULIET.
O shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help!

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O Juliet, I already know thy grief;
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.

JULIET.
Tell me not, Friar, that thou hearst of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife Ill help it presently.
God joind my heart and Romeos, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeos seald,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore, out of thy long-experiencd time,
Give me some present counsel, or behold
Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die,
If what thou speakst speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That copst with death himself to scape from it.
And if thou darst, Ill give thee remedy.

JULIET.
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears;
Or hide me nightly in a charnel-house,
Oer-coverd quite with dead mens rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave,
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble,
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstaind wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold then. Go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow;
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone,
Let not thy Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off,
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest,
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes; thy eyes windows fall,
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part deprivd of supple government,
Shall stiff and stark and cold appear like death.
And in this borrowd likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes, uncoverd, on the bier,
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Abate thy valour in the acting it.

JULIET.
Give me, give me! O tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. Ill send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET.
Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE II. Hall in Capulets House.
Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet, Nurse and Servants.

CAPULET.
So many guests invite as here are writ.

[Exit first Servant.]

Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

SECOND SERVANT.
You shall have none ill, sir; for Ill try if they can lick their fingers.

CAPULET.
How canst thou try them so?

SECOND SERVANT.
Marry, sir, tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers; therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET.
Go, begone.

[Exit second Servant.]

We shall be much unfurnishd for this time.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?

NURSE.
Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET.
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self-willd harlotry it is.

Enter Juliet.

NURSE.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET.
How now, my headstrong. Where have you been gadding?

JULIET.
Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests; and am enjoind
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here,
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you.
Henceforward I am ever ruld by you.

CAPULET.
Send for the County, go tell him of this.
Ill have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

JULIET.
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence cell,
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not stepping oer the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET.
Why, I am glad ont. This is well. Stand up.
This is ast should be. Let me see the County.
Ay, marry. Go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now afore God, this reverend holy Friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?

LADY CAPULET.
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.

CAPULET.
Go, Nurse, go with her. Well to church tomorrow.

[Exeunt Juliet and Nurse.]

LADY CAPULET.
We shall be short in our provision,
Tis now near night.

CAPULET.
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
Ill not to bed tonight, let me alone.
Ill play the housewife for this once.What, ho!
They are all forth: well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimd.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE III. Juliets Chamber.
Enter Juliet and Nurse.

JULIET.
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle Nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight;
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou knowst, is cross and full of sin.

Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET.
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?

JULIET.
No, madam; we have culld such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET.
Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.

[Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse.]

JULIET.
Farewell. God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
Ill call them back again to comfort me.
Nurse!What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.

[Laying down her dagger.]

What if it be a poison, which the Friar
Subtly hath ministerd to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonourd,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? Theres a fearful point!
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packd,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad.
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And, in this rage, with some great kinsmans bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
O look, methinks I see my cousins ghost
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon a rapiers point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, heres drink! I drink to thee.

[Throws herself on the bed.]


SCENE IV. Hall in Capulets House.
Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.

LADY CAPULET.
Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, Nurse.

NURSE.
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

Enter Capulet.

CAPULET.
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowd,
The curfew bell hath rung, tis three oclock.
Look to the bakd meats, good Angelica;
Spare not for cost.

NURSE.
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed; faith, youll be sick tomorrow
For this nights watching.

CAPULET.
No, not a whit. What! I have watchd ere now
All night for lesser cause, and neer been sick.

LADY CAPULET.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
But I will watch you from such watching now.

[Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse.]

CAPULET.
A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!

Enter Servants, with spits, logs and baskets.

Now, fellow, whats there?

FIRST SERVANT.
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

CAPULET.
Make haste, make haste.

[Exit First Servant.]

Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

SECOND SERVANT.
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

[Exit.]

CAPULET.
Mass and well said; a merry whoreson, ha.
Thou shalt be loggerhead.Good faith, tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would. I hear him near.

[Play music.]

Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!

Re-enter Nurse.

Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up.
Ill go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste I say.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE V. Juliets Chamber; Juliet on the bed.
Enter Nurse.

NURSE.
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Why, lamb, why, lady, fie, you slug-abed!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now.
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Marry and amen. How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
Hell fright you up, ifaith. Will it not be?
What, dressd, and in your clothes, and down again?
I must needs wake you. Lady! Lady! Lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! My ladys dead!
O, well-a-day that ever I was born.
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! My lady!

Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET.
What noise is here?

NURSE.
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET.
What is the matter?

NURSE.
Look, look! O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET.
O me, O me! My child, my only life.
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.

Enter Capulet.

CAPULET.
For shame, bring Juliet forth, her lord is come.

NURSE.
Shes dead, deceasd, shes dead; alack the day!

LADY CAPULET.
Alack the day, shes dead, shes dead, shes dead!

CAPULET.
Ha! Let me see her. Out alas! Shes cold,
Her blood is settled and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

NURSE.
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET.
O woful time!

CAPULET.
Death, that hath taen her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

Enter Friar Lawrence and Paris with Musicians.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET.
Ready to go, but never to return.
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Hath death lain with thy bride. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law, death is my heir;
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die.
And leave him all; life, living, all is deaths.

PARIS.
Have I thought long to see this mornings face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET.
Accursd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day.
Most miserable hour that eer time saw
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage.
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catchd it from my sight.

NURSE.
O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day.
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day.
Never was seen so black a day as this.
O woeful day, O woeful day.

PARIS.
Beguild, divorced, wronged, spited, slain.
Most detestable death, by thee beguild,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown.
O love! O life! Not life, but love in death!

CAPULET.
Despisd, distressed, hated, martyrd, killd.
Uncomfortable time, why camst thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! My soul, and not my child,
Dead art thou. Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Peace, ho, for shame. Confusions cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid, now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion,
For twas your heaven she should be advancd,
And weep ye now, seeing she is advancd
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
Shes not well married that lives married long,
But shes best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best array bear her to church;
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet natures tears are reasons merriment.

CAPULET.
All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris, everyone prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lower upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.

[Exeunt Capulet, Lady Capulet, Paris and Friar.]

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.

NURSE.
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For well you know this is a pitiful case.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

[Exit Nurse.]

Enter Peter.

PETER.
Musicians, O, musicians, Hearts ease, Hearts ease, O, and you will have me live, play Hearts ease.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Why Hearts ease?

PETER.
O musicians, because my heart itself plays My heart is full. O play me some merry dump to comfort me.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Not a dump we, tis no time to play now.

PETER.
You will not then?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
No.

PETER.
I will then give it you soundly.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
What will you give us?

PETER.
No money, on my faith, but the gleek! I will give you the minstrel.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Then will I give you the serving-creature.

PETER.
Then will I lay the serving-creatures dagger on your pate. I will carry no crotchets. Ill re you, Ill fa you. Do you note me?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
And you re us and fa us, you note us.

SECOND MUSICIAN.
Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

PETER.
Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
    When griping griefs the heart doth wound,
      And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
    Then music with her silver sound
Why silver sound? Why music with her silver sound? What say you, Simon Catling?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

PETER.
Prates. What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

SECOND MUSICIAN.
I say silver sound because musicians sound for silver.

PETER.
Prates too! What say you, James Soundpost?

THIRD MUSICIAN.
Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER.
O, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is music with her silver sound because musicians have no gold for sounding.
      Then music with her silver sound
      With speedy help doth lend redress.

[Exit.]

FIRST MUSICIAN.
What a pestilent knave is this same!

SECOND MUSICIAN.
Hang him, Jack. Come, well in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.

[Exeunt.]


ACT V
SCENE I. Mantua. A Street.
Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
If I may trust the flattering eye of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosoms lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all this day an unaccustomd spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead,
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think!
And breathd such life with kisses in my lips,
That I revivd, and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possessd,
When but loves shadows are so rich in joy.

Enter Balthasar.

News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again;
For nothing can be ill if she be well.

BALTHASAR.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capels monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindreds vault,
And presently took post to tell it you.
O pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO.
Is it even so? Then I defy you, stars!
Thou knowst my lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses. I will hence tonight.

BALTHASAR.
I do beseech you sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.

ROMEO.
Tush, thou art deceivd.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?

BALTHASAR.
No, my good lord.

ROMEO.
No matter. Get thee gone,
And hire those horses. Ill be with thee straight.

[Exit Balthasar.]

Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Lets see for means. O mischief thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
I do remember an apothecary,
And hereabouts he dwells,which late I noted
In tatterd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples, meagre were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffd, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinly scatterd, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
And if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggars shop is shut.
What, ho! Apothecary!

Enter Apothecary.

APOTHECARY.
Who calls so loud?

ROMEO.
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
And that the trunk may be dischargd of breath
As violently as hasty powder fird
Doth hurry from the fatal cannons womb.

APOTHECARY.
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantuas law
Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fearst to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.
The world is not thy friend, nor the worlds law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.

APOTHECARY.
My poverty, but not my will consents.

ROMEO.
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.

APOTHECARY.
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would despatch you straight.

ROMEO.
There is thy gold, worse poison to mens souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none.
Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliets grave, for there must I use thee.

[Exeunt.]


SCENE II. Friar Lawrences Cell.
Enter Friar John.

FRIAR JOHN.
Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, ho!

Enter Friar Lawrence.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN.
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Seald up the doors, and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stayd.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Who bare my letter then to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN.
I could not send it,here it is again,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN.
Brother, Ill go and bring it thee.

[Exit.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.
Poor living corse, closd in a dead mans tomb.

[Exit.]


SCENE III. A churchyard; in it a Monument belonging to the Capulets.
Enter Paris, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch.

PARIS.
Give me thy torch, boy. Hence and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground;
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hearst something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

PAGE.
[Aside.] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.

[Retires.]

PARIS.
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or wanting that, with tears distilld by moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep,
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.

[The Page whistles.]

The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way tonight,
To cross my obsequies and true loves rite?
What, with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.

[Retires.]

Enter Romeo and Balthasar with a torch, mattock, &c.

ROMEO.
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light; upon thy life I charge thee,
Whateer thou hearst or seest, stand all aloof
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my ladys face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
But if thou jealous dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven I will tear thee joint by joint,
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my intents are savage-wild;
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR.
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

ROMEO.
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Live, and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR.
For all this same, Ill hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.

[Retires]

ROMEO.
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorgd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,

[Breaking open the door of the monument.]

And in despite, Ill cram thee with more food.

PARIS.
This is that banishd haughty Montague
That murderd my loves cousin,with which grief,
It is supposed, the fair creature died,
And here is come to do some villanous shame
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.

[Advances.]

Stop thy unhallowd toil, vile Montague.
Can vengeance be pursud further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey, and go with me, for thou must die.

ROMEO.
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head
By urging me to fury. O be gone.
By heaven I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither armd against myself.
Stay not, be gone, live, and hereafter say,
A madmans mercy bid thee run away.

PARIS.
I do defy thy conjuration,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO.
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!

[They fight.]

PAGE.
O lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.

[Exit.]

PARIS.
O, I am slain! [Falls.] If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

[Dies.]

ROMEO.
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutios kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortunes book.
Ill bury thee in a triumphant grave.
A grave? O no, a lantern, slaughtred youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interrd.

[Laying Paris in the monument.]

How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! Which their keepers call
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Call this a lightning? O my love, my wife,
Death that hath suckd the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquerd. Beautys ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And deaths pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin. Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous;
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that I still will stay with thee,
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest;
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last.
Arms, take your last embrace! And, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death.
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide.
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark.
Heres to my love! [Drinks.] O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.

[Dies.]

Enter, at the other end of the Churchyard, Friar Lawrence, with a lantern, crow, and spade.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Saint Francis be my speed. How oft tonight
Have my old feet stumbled at graves? Whos there?
Who is it that consorts, so late, the dead?

BALTHASAR.
Heres one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Bliss be upon you. Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels monument.

BALTHASAR.
It doth so, holy sir, and theres my master,
One that you love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Who is it?

BALTHASAR.
Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR.
Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR.
I dare not, sir;
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Stay then, Ill go alone. Fear comes upon me.
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

BALTHASAR.
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo! [Advances.]
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolourd by this place of peace?

[Enters the monument.]

Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steepd in blood? Ah what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance?
The lady stirs.

[Juliet wakes and stirs.]

JULIET.
O comfortable Friar, where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

[Noise within.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, Ill dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.

JULIET.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.

[Exit Friar Lawrence.]

Whats here? A cup closd in my true loves hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
O churl. Drink all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.

[Kisses him.]

Thy lips are warm!

FIRST WATCH.
[Within.] Lead, boy. Which way?

JULIET.
Yea, noise? Then Ill be brief. O happy dagger.

[Snatching Romeos dagger.]

This is thy sheath. [stabs herself] There rest, and let me die.

[Falls on Romeos body and dies.]

Enter Watch with the Page of Paris.

PAGE.
This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.

FIRST WATCH.
The ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
Go, some of you, whoeer you find attach.

[Exeunt some of the Watch.]

Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Go tell the Prince; run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues, some others search.

[Exeunt others of the Watch.]

We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.

Re-enter some of the Watch with Balthasar.

SECOND WATCH.
Heres Romeos man. We found him in the churchyard.

FIRST WATCH.
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

Re-enter others of the Watch with Friar Lawrence.

THIRD WATCH.
Here is a Friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchyard side.

FIRST WATCH.
A great suspicion. Stay the Friar too.

Enter the Prince and Attendants.

PRINCE.
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our mornings rest?

Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet and others.

CAPULET.
What should it be that they so shriek abroad?

LADY CAPULET.
O the people in the street cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all run
With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE.
What fear is this which startles in our ears?

FIRST WATCH.
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new killd.

PRINCE.
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

FIRST WATCH.
Here is a Friar, and slaughterd Romeos man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead mens tombs.

CAPULET.
O heaven! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mistaen, for lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathed in my daughters bosom.

LADY CAPULET.
O me! This sight of death is as a bell
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

Enter Montague and others.

PRINCE.
Come, Montague, for thou art early up,
To see thy son and heir more early down.

MONTAGUE.
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight.
Grief of my sons exile hath stoppd her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE.
Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE.
O thou untaught! What manners is in this,
To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE.
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent,
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murder.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excusd.

PRINCE.
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she, there dead, that Romeos faithful wife.
I married them; and their stoln marriage day
Was Tybalts doomsday, whose untimely death
Banishd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pind.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betrothd, and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks, bid me devise some means
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her, so tutored by my art,
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrowd grave,
Being the time the potions force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stayd by accident; and yesternight
Returnd my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindreds vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Her Nurse is privy. And if ought in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificd, some hour before his time,
Unto the rigour of severest law.

PRINCE.
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Wheres Romeos man? What can he say to this?

BALTHASAR.
I brought my master news of Juliets death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threatend me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not, and left him there.

PRINCE.
Give me the letter, I will look on it.
Where is the Countys Page that raisd the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE.
He came with flowers to strew his ladys grave,
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And by and by my master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE.
This letter doth make good the Friars words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death.
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punishd.

CAPULET.
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
This is my daughters jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

MONTAGUE.
But I can give thee more,
For I will raise her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET.
As rich shall Romeos by his ladys lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.

PRINCE.
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardond, and some punished,
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

[Exeunt.]


THE TAMING OF THE SHREW
Contents
INDUCTION 
Scene I. Before an alehouse on a heath.
Scene II. A bedchamber in the LORDS house.

ACT I
Scene I. Padua. A public place.
Scene II. Padua. Before HORTENSIOS house.

ACT II
Scene I. Padua. A room in BAPTISTAS house.

ACT III
Scene I. Padua. A room in BAPTISTAS house.
Scene II. The same. Before BAPTISTAS house.

ACT IV
Scene I. A hall in PETRUCHIOS country house.
Scene II. Padua. Before BAPTISTAS house.
Scene III. A room in PETRUCHIOS house.
Scene IV. Before BAPTISTAS house.
Scene V. A public road.

ACT V
Scene I. Padua. Before LUCENTIOS house.
Scene II. A room in LUCENTIOS house.




Dramatis Person
Persons in the Induction
A LORD
CHRISTOPHER SLY, a tinker
HOSTESS
PAGE
PLAYERS
HUNTSMEN
SERVANTS
BAPTISTA MINOLA, a rich gentleman of Padua
VINCENTIO, an old gentleman of Pisa
LUCENTIO, son to Vincentio; in love with Bianca
PETRUCHIO, a gentleman of Verona; suitor to Katherina
Suitors to Bianca
GREMIO
HORTENSIO
Servants to Lucentio
TRANIO
BIONDELLO
Servants to Petruchio
GRUMIO
CURTIS
PEDANT, set up to personate Vincentio

Daughters to Baptista
KATHERINA, the shrew
BIANCA
WIDOW

Tailor, Haberdasher, and Servants attending on Baptista and Petruchio
SCENE: Sometimes in Padua, and sometimes in PETRUCHIOS house in the country.

INDUCTION
SCENE I. Before an alehouse on a heath.
Enter Hostess and Sly

SLY.
Ill pheeze you, in faith.
HOSTESS.
A pair of stocks, you rogue!
SLY.
Yare a baggage; the Slys are no rogues; look in the chronicles: we came in with Richard Conqueror. Therefore, paucas pallabris; let the world slide. Sessa!

HOSTESS.
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
SLY.
No, not a denier. Go by, Saint Jeronimy, go to thy cold bed and warm thee.

HOSTESS.
I know my remedy; I must go fetch the third-borough.
[Exit]

SLY.
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, Ill answer him by law. Ill not budge an inch, boy: let him come, and kindly.

[Lies down on the ground, and falls asleep.]

Horns winded. Enter a Lord from hunting, with Huntsmen and Servants.

LORD.
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds;
Brach Merriman, the poor cur is embossd,
And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthd brach.
Sawst thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault?
I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
FIRST HUNTSMAN.
Why, Bellman is as good as he, my lord;
He cried upon it at the merest loss,
And twice today pickd out the dullest scent;
Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
LORD.
Thou art a fool: if Echo were as fleet,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such.
But sup them well, and look unto them all;
Tomorrow I intend to hunt again.
FIRST HUNTSMAN.
I will, my lord.
LORD.
[ Sees Sly.] Whats here? One dead, or drunk?
See, doth he breathe?
SECOND HUNTSMAN.
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warmd with ale,
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
LORD.
O monstrous beast! how like a swine he lies!
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were conveyd to bed,
Wrappd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?
FIRST HUNTSMAN.
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
SECOND HUNTSMAN.
It would seem strange unto him when he wakd.
LORD.
Even as a flattering dream or worthless fancy.
Then take him up, and manage well the jest.
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber,
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures;
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters,
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet.
Procure me music ready when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound;
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight,
And with a low submissive reverence
Say What is it your honour will command?
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Full of rose-water and bestrewd with flowers;
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
And say Willt please your lordship cool your hands?
Someone be ready with a costly suit,
And ask him what apparel he will wear;
Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
And that his lady mourns at his disease.
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic;
And, when he says he issay that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs;
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.
FIRST HUNTSMAN.
My lord, I warrant you we will play our part,
As he shall think by our true diligence,
He is no less than what we say he is.
LORD.
Take him up gently, and to bed with him,
And each one to his office when he wakes.
[Sly is bourne out. A trumpet sounds.]

Sirrah, go see what trumpet tis that sounds:

[Exit Servant.]

Belike some noble gentleman that means,
Travelling some journey, to repose him here.
Re-enter Servant.

How now! who is it?

SERVANT.
An it please your honour, players
That offer service to your lordship.
LORD.
Bid them come near.
Enter Players.

Now, fellows, you are welcome.

PLAYERS.
We thank your honour.
LORD.
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
PLAYER.
So please your lordship to accept our duty.
LORD.
With all my heart. This fellow I remember
Since once he playd a farmers eldest son;
Twas where you wood the gentlewoman so well.
I have forgot your name; but, sure, that part
Was aptly fitted and naturally performd.
PLAYER.
I think twas Soto that your honour means.
LORD.
Tis very true; thou didst it excellent.
Well, you are come to me in happy time,
The rather for I have some sport in hand
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a lord will hear you play tonight;
But I am doubtful of your modesties,
Lest, over-eying of his odd behaviour,
For yet his honour never heard a play,
You break into some merry passion
And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,
If you should smile, he grows impatient.
PLAYER.
Fear not, my lord; we can contain ourselves,
Were he the veriest antick in the world.
LORD.
Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
And give them friendly welcome everyone:
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
[Exit one with the Players.]

Sirrah, go you to Bartholmew my page,
And see him dressd in all suits like a lady;
That done, conduct him to the drunkards chamber,
And call him madam, do him obeisance.
Tell him from meas he will win my love,
He bear himself with honourable action,
Such as he hath observd in noble ladies
Unto their lords, by them accomplished;
Such duty to the drunkard let him do,
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
And say What ist your honour will command,
Wherein your lady and your humble wife
May show her duty and make known her love?
And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom,
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyd
To see her noble lord restord to health,
Who for this seven years hath esteemed him
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar.
And if the boy have not a womans gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for such a shift,
Which, in a napkin being close conveyd,
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
See this dispatchd with all the haste thou canst;
Anon Ill give thee more instructions.
[Exit Servant.]

I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman;
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband;
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
When they do homage to this simple peasant.
Ill in to counsel them; haply my presence
May well abate the over-merry spleen,
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
[Exeunt.]



SCENE II. A bedchamber in the LORDS house.
Sly is discovered in a rich nightgown, with Attendants: some with apparel, basin, ewer, and other appurtenances; and Lord, dressed like a servant.

SLY.
For Gods sake! a pot of small ale.
FIRST SERVANT.
Willt please your lordship drink a cup of sack?
SECOND SERVANT.
Willt please your honour taste of these conserves?
THIRD SERVANT.
What raiment will your honour wear today?
SLY.
I am Christophero Sly; call not me honour nor lordship. I neer drank sack in my life; and if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef. Neer ask me what raiment Ill wear, for I have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor no more shoes than feet: nay, sometime more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over-leather.

LORD.
Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour!
O, that a mighty man of such descent,
Of such possessions, and so high esteem,
Should be infused with so foul a spirit!
SLY.
What! would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher Sly, old Slys son of Burton-heath; by birth a pedlar, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a bear-herd, and now by present profession a tinker? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of Wincot, if she know me not: if she say I am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lyingest knave in Christendom. What! I am not bestraught. Heres

THIRD SERVANT.
O! this it is that makes your lady mourn.
SECOND SERVANT.
O! this is it that makes your servants droop.
LORD.
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck:
Wilt thou have music? Hark! Apollo plays,
[Music.]

And twenty caged nightingales do sing:
Or wilt thou sleep? Well have thee to a couch
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
On purpose trimmd up for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walk: we will bestrew the ground:
Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trappd,
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar
Above the morning lark: or wilt thou hunt?
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
FIRST SERVANT.
Say thou wilt course; thy greyhounds are as swift
As breathed stags; ay, fleeter than the roe.
SECOND SERVANT.
Dost thou love pictures? We will fetch thee straight
Adonis painted by a running brook,
And Cytherea all in sedges hid,
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
LORD.
Well show thee Io as she was a maid
And how she was beguiled and surprisd,
As lively painted as the deed was done.
THIRD SERVANT.
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs, that one shall swear she bleeds
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
LORD.
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord:
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
Than any woman in this waning age.
FIRST SERVANT.
And, till the tears that she hath shed for thee
Like envious floods oer-run her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world;
And yet she is inferior to none.
SLY.
Am I a lord? and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream? Or have I dreamd till now?
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
I smell sweet savours, and I feel soft things:
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed;
And not a tinker, nor Christophero Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
And once again, a pot o the smallest ale.
SECOND SERVANT.
Willt please your mightiness to wash your hands?
[Servants present a ewer, basin and napkin.]

O, how we joy to see your wit restord!
O, that once more you knew but what you are!
These fifteen years you have been in a dream,
Or, when you wakd, so wakd as if you slept.
SLY.
These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap.
But did I never speak of all that time?
FIRST SERVANT.
O! yes, my lord, but very idle words;
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door,
And rail upon the hostess of the house,
And say you would present her at the leet,
Because she brought stone jugs and no seald quarts.
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
SLY.
Ay, the womans maid of the house.
THIRD SERVANT.
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,
Nor no such men as you have reckond up,
As Stephen Sly, and old John Naps of Greece,
And Peter Turph, and Henry Pimpernell;
And twenty more such names and men as these,
Which never were, nor no man ever saw.
SLY.
Now, Lord be thanked for my good amends!
ALL.
Amen.
Enter the Page, as a lady, with Attendants.

SLY.
I thank thee; thou shalt not lose by it.
PAGE.
How fares my noble lord?
SLY.
Marry, I fare well; for here is cheer enough.
Where is my wife?
PAGE.
Here, noble lord: what is thy will with her?
SLY.
Are you my wife, and will not call me husband?
My men should call me lord: I am your goodman.
PAGE.
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband;
I am your wife in all obedience.
SLY.
I know it well. What must I call her?
LORD.
Madam.
SLY.
Alice madam, or Joan madam?
LORD.
Madam, and nothing else; so lords call ladies.
SLY.
Madam wife, they say that I have dreamd
And slept above some fifteen year or more.
PAGE.
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandond from your bed.
SLY.
Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
Madam, undress you, and come now to bed.
PAGE.
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two;
Or, if not so, until the sun be set:
For your physicians have expressly chargd,
In peril to incur your former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed:
I hope this reason stands for my excuse.
SLY.
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long; but I would be loath to fall into my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Your honours players, hearing your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy;
For so your doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness hath congeald your blood,
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy:
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play,
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
SLY.
Marry, I will; let them play it. Is not a commonty a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?

PAGE.
No, my good lord; it is more pleasing stuff.
SLY.
What! household stuff?
PAGE.
It is a kind of history.
SLY.
Well, well seet. Come, madam wife, sit by my side and let the world slip: we shall neer be younger.


ACT I
SCENE I. Padua. A public place.
Flourish. Enter Lucentio and Tranio.

LUCENTIO.
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
I am arrivd for fruitful Lombardy,
The pleasant garden of great Italy,
And by my fathers love and leave am armd
With his good will and thy good company,
My trusty servant well approvd in all,
Here let us breathe, and haply institute
A course of learning and ingenious studies.
Pisa, renowned for grave citizens,
Gave me my being and my father first,
A merchant of great traffic through the world,
Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii.
Vincentios son, brought up in Florence,
It shall become to serve all hopes conceivd,
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds:
And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
Virtue and that part of philosophy
Will I apply that treats of happiness
By virtue specially to be achievd.
Tell me thy mind; for I have Pisa left
And am to Padua come as he that leaves
A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep,
And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.
TRANIO.
Mi perdonato, gentle master mine;
I am in all affected as yourself;
Glad that you thus continue your resolve
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Only, good master, while we do admire
This virtue and this moral discipline,
Lets be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray;
Or so devote to Aristotles checks
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjurd.
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,
And practise rhetoric in your common talk;
Music and poesy use to quicken you;
The mathematics and the metaphysics,
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you:
No profit grows where is no pleasure taen;
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
LUCENTIO.
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
We could at once put us in readiness,
And take a lodging fit to entertain
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
But stay awhile; what company is this?
TRANIO.
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
[Lucentio and Tranio stand aside.]

Enter Baptista, Katherina, Bianca, Gremio and Hortensio.

BAPTISTA.
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am resolvd you know;
That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter
Before I have a husband for the elder.
If either of you both love Katherina,
Because I know you well and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
GREMIO.
To cart her rather: shes too rough for me.
There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
KATHERINA.
[To Baptista] I pray you, sir, is it your will
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?
HORTENSIO.
Mates, maid! How mean you that? No mates for you,
Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.
KATHERINA.
I faith, sir, you shall never need to fear;
I wis it is not half way to her heart;
But if it were, doubt not her care should be
To comb your noddle with a three-leggd stool,
And paint your face, and use you like a fool.
HORTENSIO.
From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!
GREMIO.
And me, too, good Lord!
TRANIO.
Husht, master! Heres some good pastime toward:
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
LUCENTIO.
But in the others silence do I see
Maids mild behaviour and sobriety.
Peace, Tranio!
TRANIO.
Well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.
BAPTISTA.
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said,Bianca, get you in:
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
For I will love thee neer the less, my girl.
KATHERINA.
A pretty peat! it is best put finger in the eye, and she knew why.

BIANCA.
Sister, content you in my discontent.
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe:
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to look, and practise by myself.
LUCENTIO.
Hark, Tranio! thou mayst hear Minerva speak.
HORTENSIO.
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
Sorry am I that our good will effects
Biancas grief.
GREMIO.
Why will you mew her up,
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue?
BAPTISTA.
Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolvd.
Go in, Bianca.
[Exit Bianca.]

And for I know she taketh most delight
In music, instruments, and poetry,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house
Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,
Or, Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
I will be very kind, and liberal
To mine own children in good bringing up;
And so, farewell. Katherina, you may stay;
For I have more to commune with Bianca.
[Exit.]

KATHERINA.
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What! shall I be appointed hours, as though, belike, I knew not what to take and what to leave? Ha!

[Exit.]

GREMIO.
You may go to the devils dam: your gifts are so good heres none will hold you. Their love is not so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together, and fast it fairly out; our cakes dough on both sides. Farewell: yet, for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her father.

HORTENSIO.
So will I, Signior Gremio: but a word, I pray. Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both,that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress, and be happy rivals in Biancas love,to labour and effect one thing specially.

GREMIO.
Whats that, I pray?
HORTENSIO.
Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
GREMIO.
A husband! a devil.
HORTENSIO.
I say, a husband.
GREMIO.
I say, a devil. Thinkest thou, Hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?

HORTENSIO.
Tush, Gremio! Though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellows in the world, and a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.

GREMIO.
I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her dowry with this condition: to be whippd at the high cross every morning.

HORTENSIO.
Faith, as you say, theres small choice in rotten apples. But come; since this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained, till by helping Baptistas eldest daughter to a husband, we set his youngest free for a husband, and then have tot afresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring. How say you, Signior Gremio?

GREMIO.
I am agreed; and would I had given him the best horse in Padua to begin his wooing, that would thoroughly woo her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the house of her. Come on.

[Exeunt Gremio and Hortensio.]

TRANIO.
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold?
LUCENTIO.
O Tranio! till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely;
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
I found the effect of love in idleness;
And now in plainness do confess to thee,
That art to me as secret and as dear
As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was,
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst:
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
TRANIO.
Master, it is no time to chide you now;
Affection is not rated from the heart:
If love have touchd you, nought remains but so:
Redime te captum quam queas minimo.
LUCENTIO.
Gramercies, lad; go forward; this contents;
The rest will comfort, for thy counsels sound.
TRANIO.
Master, you lookd so longly on the maid.
Perhaps you markd not whats the pith of all.
LUCENTIO.
O, yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand,
When with his knees he kissd the Cretan strand.
TRANIO.
Saw you no more? markd you not how her sister
Began to scold and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
LUCENTIO.
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move,
And with her breath she did perfume the air;
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
TRANIO.
Nay, then, tis time to stir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir: if you love the maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd,
That till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home;
And therefore has he closely mewd her up,
Because she will not be annoyd with suitors.
LUCENTIO.
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel fathers he!
But art thou not advisd he took some care
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
TRANIO.
Ay, marry, am I, sir, and now tis plotted.
LUCENTIO.
I have it, Tranio.
TRANIO.
Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
LUCENTIO.
Tell me thine first.
TRANIO.
You will be schoolmaster,
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
Thats your device.
LUCENTIO.
It is: may it be done?
TRANIO.
Not possible; for who shall bear your part
And be in Padua here Vincentios son;
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends;
Visit his countrymen, and banquet them?
LUCENTIO.
Basta, content thee, for I have it full.
We have not yet been seen in any house,
Nor can we be distinguishd by our faces
For man or master: then it follows thus:
Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,
Keep house and port and servants, as I should;
I will some other be; some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
Tis hatchd, and shall be so: Tranio, at once
Uncase thee; take my colourd hat and cloak.
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee;
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
[They exchange habits]

TRANIO.
So had you need.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient;
For so your father chargd me at our parting,
Be serviceable to my son, quoth he,
Although I think twas in another sense:
I am content to be Lucentio,
Because so well I love Lucentio.
LUCENTIO.
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves;
And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid
Whose sudden sight hath thralld my wounded eye.
Enter Biondello.

Here comes the rogue. Sirrah, where have you been?

BIONDELLO.
Where have I been? Nay, how now! where are you?
Master, has my fellow Tranio stoln your clothes?
Or you stoln his? or both? Pray, whats the news?
LUCENTIO.
Sirrah, come hither: tis no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
Puts my apparel and my countnance on,
And I for my escape have put on his;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
I killd a man, and fear I was descried.
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
While I make way from hence to save my life.
You understand me?
BIONDELLO.
I, sir! Neer a whit.
LUCENTIO.
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth:
Tranio is changed to Lucentio.
BIONDELLO.
The better for him: would I were so too!
TRANIO.
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptistas youngest daughter.
But, sirrah, not for my sake but your masters, I advise
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies:
When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio;
But in all places else your master, Lucentio.
LUCENTIO.
Tranio, lets go.
One thing more rests, that thyself execute,
To make one among these wooers: if thou ask me why,
Sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty.
[Exeunt.]

[The Presenters above speak.]

FIRST SERVANT.
My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.

SLY.
Yes, by Saint Anne, I do. A good matter, surely: comes there any more of it?

PAGE.
My lord, tis but begun.

SLY.
Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady: would twere done!

[They sit and mark.]



SCENE II. Padua. Before HORTENSIOS house.
Enter Petruchio and his man Grumio.

PETRUCHIO.
Verona, for a while I take my leave,
To see my friends in Padua; but of all
My best beloved and approved friend,
Hortensio; and I trow this is his house.
Here, sirrah Grumio, knock, I say.
GRUMIO.
Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Is there any man has rebused your worship?

PETRUCHIO.
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
GRUMIO.
Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I should knock you here, sir?

PETRUCHIO.
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate;
And rap me well, or Ill knock your knaves pate.
GRUMIO.
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock you first,
And then I know after who comes by the worst.
PETRUCHIO.
Will it not be?
Faith, sirrah, and youll not knock, Ill ring it;
Ill try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.
[He wrings Grumio by the ears.]

GRUMIO.
Help, masters, help! my master is mad.
PETRUCHIO.
Now, knock when I bid you, sirrah villain!
Enter Hortensio.

HORTENSIO.
How now! whats the matter? My old friend Grumio! and my good friend Petruchio! How do you all at Verona?

PETRUCHIO.
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
Con tutto il cuore ben trovato, may I say.
HORTENSIO.
Alla nostra casa ben venuto; molto honorato signor mio Petruchio.
Rise, Grumio, rise: we will compound this quarrel.
GRUMIO.
Nay, tis no matter, sir, what he leges in Latin. If this be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service, look you, sir, he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir: well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so; being, perhaps, for aught I see, two-and-thirty, a pip out? Whom would to God I had well knockd at first, then had not Grumio come by the worst.

PETRUCHIO.
A senseless villain! Good Hortensio,
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate,
And could not get him for my heart to do it.
GRUMIO.
Knock at the gate! O heavens! Spake you not these words plain: Sirrah knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and knock me soundly? And come you now with knocking at the gate?

PETRUCHIO.
Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.
HORTENSIO.
Petruchio, patience; I am Grumios pledge;
Why, thiss a heavy chance twixt him and you,
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
PETRUCHIO.
Such wind as scatters young men through the world
To seek their fortunes farther than at home,
Where small experience grows. But in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
Antonio, my father, is deceasd,
And I have thrust myself into this maze,
Haply to wive and thrive as best I may;
Crowns in my purse I have, and goods at home,
And so am come abroad to see the world.
HORTENSIO.
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favourd wife?
Thoudst thank me but a little for my counsel;
And yet Ill promise thee she shall be rich,
And very rich: but thart too much my friend,
And Ill not wish thee to her.
PETRUCHIO.
Signior Hortensio, twixt such friends as we
Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchios wife,
As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
Be she as foul as was Florentius love,
As old as Sibyl, and as curst and shrewd
As Socrates Xanthippe or a worse,
She moves me not, or not removes, at least,
Affections edge in me, were she as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas:
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
GRUMIO.
Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his mind is: why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an aglet-baby; or an old trot with neer a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases as two-and-fifty horses: why, nothing comes amiss, so money comes withal.

HORTENSIO.
Petruchio, since we are steppd thus far in,
I will continue that I broachd in jest.
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
With wealth enough, and young and beauteous;
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman:
Her only fault,and that is faults enough,
Is, that she is intolerable curst,
And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure,
That, were my state far worser than it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of gold.
PETRUCHIO.
Hortensio, peace! thou knowst not golds effect:
Tell me her fathers name, and tis enough;
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
HORTENSIO.
Her father is Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman;
Her name is Katherina Minola,
Renownd in Padua for her scolding tongue.
PETRUCHIO.
I know her father, though I know not her;
And he knew my deceased father well.
I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her;
And therefore let me be thus bold with you,
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.
GRUMIO.
I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts. O my word, and she knew him as well as I do, she would think scolding would do little good upon him. She may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so; why, thats nothing; and he begin once, hell rail in his rope-tricks. Ill tell you what, sir, and she stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, and so disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat. You know him not, sir.

HORTENSIO.
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
For in Baptistas keep my treasure is:
He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca,
And her withholds from me and other more,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love;
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsd,
That ever Katherina will be wood:
Therefore this order hath Baptista taen,
That none shall have access unto Bianca
Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.
GRUMIO.
Katherine the curst!
A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
HORTENSIO.
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguisd in sober robes,
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca;
That so I may, by this device at least
Have leave and leisure to make love to her,
And unsuspected court her by herself.
GRUMIO.
Heres no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together!

Enter Gremio and Lucentio disguised, with books under his arm.

Master, master, look about you: who goes there, ha?

HORTENSIO.
Peace, Grumio! It is the rival of my love. Petruchio, stand by awhile.

GRUMIO.
A proper stripling, and an amorous!
GREMIO.
O! very well; I have perusd the note.
Hark you, sir; Ill have them very fairly bound:
All books of love, see that at any hand,
And see you read no other lectures to her.
You understand me. Over and beside
Signior Baptistas liberality,
Ill mend it with a largess. Take your papers too,
And let me have them very well perfumd;
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to. What will you read to her?
LUCENTIO.
Whateer I read to her, Ill plead for you,
As for my patron, stand you so assurd,
As firmly as yourself were still in place;
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words
Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
GREMIO.
O! this learning, what a thing it is.
GRUMIO.
O! this woodcock, what an ass it is.
PETRUCHIO.
Peace, sirrah!
HORTENSIO.
Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio!
GREMIO.
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
I promisd to enquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca;
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man; for learning and behaviour
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.
HORTENSIO.
Tis well; and I have met a gentleman
Hath promisd me to help me to another,
A fine musician to instruct our mistress:
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so belovd of me.
GREMIO.
Belovd of me, and that my deeds shall prove.
GRUMIO.
[Aside.] And that his bags shall prove.
HORTENSIO.
Gremio, tis now no time to vent our love:
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,
Ill tell you news indifferent good for either.
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo curst Katherine;
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
GREMIO.
So said, so done, is well.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
PETRUCHIO.
I know she is an irksome brawling scold;
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
GREMIO.
No, sayst me so, friend? What countryman?
PETRUCHIO.
Born in Verona, old Antonios son.
My father dead, my fortune lives for me;
And I do hope good days and long to see.
GREMIO.
O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange!
But if you have a stomach, tot a Gods name;
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this wild-cat?
PETRUCHIO.
Will I live?
GRUMIO.
Will he woo her? Ay, or Ill hang her.
PETRUCHIO.
Why came I hither but to that intent?
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea, puffd up with winds,
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
And heavens artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets clang?
And do you tell me of a womans tongue,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear
As will a chestnut in a farmers fire?
Tush, tush! fear boys with bugs.
GRUMIO.
[Aside] For he fears none.
GREMIO.
Hortensio, hark:
This gentleman is happily arrivd,
My mind presumes, for his own good and yours.
HORTENSIO.
I promisd we would be contributors,
And bear his charge of wooing, whatsoeer.
GREMIO.
And so we will, provided that he win her.
GRUMIO.
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
Enter Tranio brave, and Biondello.

TRANIO.
Gentlemen, God save you! If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
BIONDELLO.
He that has the two fair daughters; ist he you mean?
TRANIO.
Even he, Biondello!
GREMIO.
Hark you, sir, you mean not her to
TRANIO.
Perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
PETRUCHIO.
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
TRANIO.
I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, lets away.
LUCENTIO.
[Aside] Well begun, Tranio.
HORTENSIO.
Sir, a word ere you go.
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
TRANIO.
And if I be, sir, is it any offence?
GREMIO.
No; if without more words you will get you hence.
TRANIO.
Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me as for you?
GREMIO.
But so is not she.
TRANIO.
For what reason, I beseech you?
GREMIO.
For this reason, if youll know,
That shes the choice love of Signior Gremio.
HORTENSIO.
That shes the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
TRANIO.
Softly, my masters! If you be gentlemen,
Do me this right; hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noble gentleman,
To whom my father is not all unknown;
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have, and me for one.
Fair Ledas daughter had a thousand wooers;
Then well one more may fair Bianca have;
And so she shall: Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
GREMIO.
What, this gentleman will out-talk us all.
LUCENTIO.
Sir, give him head; I know hell prove a jade.
PETRUCHIO.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
HORTENSIO.
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptistas daughter?
TRANIO.
No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two,
The one as famous for a scolding tongue
As is the other for beauteous modesty.
PETRUCHIO.
Sir, sir, the firsts for me; let her go by.
GREMIO.
Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules,
And let it be more than Alcides twelve.
PETRUCHIO.
Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:
The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,
Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
And will not promise her to any man
Until the elder sister first be wed;
The younger then is free, and not before.
TRANIO.
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest;
And if you break the ice, and do this feat,
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
HORTENSIO.
Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive;
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.
TRANIO.
Sir, I shall not be slack; in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our mistress health;
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
GRUMIO, BIONDELLO.
O excellent motion! Fellows, lets be gone.
HORTENSIO.
The motions good indeed, and be it so:
Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.
[Exeunt.]


ACT II
SCENE I. Padua. A room in BAPTISTAS house.
Enter Katherina and Bianca.

BIANCA.
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me;
That I disdain; but for these other gawds,
Unbind my hands, Ill pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.
KATHERINA.
Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tell
Whom thou lovst best: see thou dissemble not.
BIANCA.
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I never yet beheld that special face
Which I could fancy more than any other.
KATHERINA.
Minion, thou liest. Ist not Hortensio?
BIANCA.
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
Ill plead for you myself but you shall have him.
KATHERINA.
O! then, belike, you fancy riches more:
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
BIANCA.
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay, then you jest; and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while:
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
KATHERINA.
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
[Strikes her.]

Enter Baptista.

BAPTISTA.
Why, how now, dame! Whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl! she weeps.
Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.
For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit,
Why dost thou wrong her that did neer wrong thee?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
KATHERINA.
Her silence flouts me, and Ill be revengd.
[Flies after Bianca.]

BAPTISTA.
What! in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.
[Exit Bianca.]

KATHERINA.
What! will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband;
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding-day,
And, for your love to her, lead apes in hell.
Talk not to me: I will go sit and weep
Till I can find occasion of revenge.
[Exit.]

BAPTISTA.
Was ever gentleman thus grievd as I?
But who comes here?
Enter Gremio, with Lucentio in the habit of a mean man; Petruchio, with Hortensio as a musician; and Tranio, with Biondello bearing a lute and books.

GREMIO.
Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.
BAPTISTA.
Good morrow, neighbour Gremio. God save you, gentlemen!
PETRUCHIO.
And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter
Calld Katherina, fair and virtuous?
BAPTISTA.
I have a daughter, sir, calld Katherina.
GREMIO.
You are too blunt: go to it orderly.
PETRUCHIO.
You wrong me, Signior Gremio: give me leave.
I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
That, hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behaviour,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report which I so oft have heard.
And, for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine,
[Presenting Hortensio.]

Cunning in music and the mathematics,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant.
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong:
His name is Licio, born in Mantua.
BAPTISTA.
Yare welcome, sir, and he for your good sake;
But for my daughter Katherine, this I know,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
PETRUCHIO.
I see you do not mean to part with her;
Or else you like not of my company.
BAPTISTA.
Mistake me not; I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
PETRUCHIO.
Petruchio is my name, Antonios son;
A man well known throughout all Italy.
BAPTISTA.
I know him well: you are welcome for his sake.
GREMIO.
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
Let us, that are poor petitioners, speak too.
Backare! you are marvellous forward.
PETRUCHIO.
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio; I would fain be doing.
GREMIO.
I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your wooing. Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young scholar,

[Presenting Lucentio.]

that has been long studying at Rheims; as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the other in music and mathematics. His name is Cambio; pray accept his service.

BAPTISTA.
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio; welcome, good Cambio. [To Tranio.] But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger. May I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?

TRANIO.
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
That, being a stranger in this city here,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome mongst the rest that woo,
And free access and favour as the rest:
And, toward the education of your daughters,
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:
If you accept them, then their worth is great.
BAPTISTA.
Lucentio is your name, of whence, I pray?
TRANIO.
Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio.
BAPTISTA.
A mighty man of Pisa: by report
I know him well: you are very welcome, sir.
[To Hortensio.] Take you the lute,
[To Lucentio.] and you the set of books;
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within!
Enter a Servant.

Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
To my daughters, and tell them both
These are their tutors: bid them use them well.
[Exeunt Servant with Hortensio, Lucentio and Biondello.]

We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
PETRUCHIO.
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
Which I have bettered rather than decreasd:
Then tell me, if I get your daughters love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
BAPTISTA.
After my death, the one half of my lands,
And in possession twenty thousand crowns.
PETRUCHIO.
And, for that dowry, Ill assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
In all my lands and leases whatsoever.
Let specialities be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.
BAPTISTA.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtaind,
That is, her love; for that is all in all.
PETRUCHIO.
Why, that is nothing; for I tell you, father,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
And where two raging fires meet together,
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury:
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all;
So I to her, and so she yields to me;
For I am rough and woo not like a babe.
BAPTISTA.
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed!
But be thou armd for some unhappy words.
PETRUCHIO.
Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,
That shake not though they blow perpetually.
Re-enter Hortensio, with his head broke.

BAPTISTA.
How now, my friend! Why dost thou look so pale?
HORTENSIO.
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
BAPTISTA.
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
HORTENSIO.
I think shell sooner prove a soldier:
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
BAPTISTA.
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
HORTENSIO.
Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bowd her hand to teach her fingering;
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
Frets, call you these? quoth she Ill fume with them;
And with that word she struck me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way;
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a pillory, looking through the lute;
While she did call me rascal fiddler,
And twangling Jack, with twenty such vile terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.
PETRUCHIO.
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench!
I love her ten times more than eer I did:
O! how I long to have some chat with her!
BAPTISTA.
[To Hortensio.] Well, go with me, and be not so discomfited;
Proceed in practice with my younger daughter;
Shes apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
PETRUCHIO.
I pray you do.
[Exeunt Baptista, Gremio, Tranio and Hortensio.]

I will attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
Say that she rail; why, then Ill tell her plain
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale:
Say that she frown; Ill say she looks as clear
As morning roses newly washd with dew:
Say she be mute, and will not speak a word;
Then Ill commend her volubility,
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence:
If she do bid me pack, Ill give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week:
If she deny to wed, Ill crave the day
When I shall ask the banns, and when be married.
But here she comes; and now, Petruchio, speak.
Enter Katherina.

Good morrow, Kate; for thats your name, I hear.

KATHERINA.
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
They call me Katherine that do talk of me.
PETRUCHIO.
You lie, in faith, for you are calld plain Kate,
And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst;
But, Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,
Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation;
Hearing thy mildness praisd in every town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
Myself am movd to woo thee for my wife.
KATHERINA.
Movd! in good time: let him that movd you hither
Remove you hence. I knew you at the first,
You were a moveable.
PETRUCHIO.
Why, whats a moveable?
KATHERINA.
A joint-stool.
PETRUCHIO.
Thou hast hit it: come, sit on me.
KATHERINA.
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
PETRUCHIO.
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
KATHERINA.
No such jade as bear you, if me you mean.
PETRUCHIO.
Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee;
For, knowing thee to be but young and light,
KATHERINA.
Too light for such a swain as you to catch;
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
PETRUCHIO.
Should be! should buz!
KATHERINA.
Well taen, and like a buzzard.

PETRUCHIO.
O, slow-wingd turtle! shall a buzzard take thee?
KATHERINA.
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
PETRUCHIO.
Come, come, you wasp; i faith, you are too angry.
KATHERINA.
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
PETRUCHIO.
My remedy is then to pluck it out.
KATHERINA.
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
PETRUCHIO.
Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting?
In his tail.
KATHERINA.
In his tongue.
PETRUCHIO.
Whose tongue?

KATHERINA.
Yours, if you talk of tales; and so farewell.
PETRUCHIO.
What! with my tongue in your tail? Nay, come again,
Good Kate; I am a gentleman.
KATHERINA.
That Ill try.
[Striking him.]

PETRUCHIO.
I swear Ill cuff you if you strike again.
KATHERINA.
So may you lose your arms:
If you strike me, you are no gentleman;
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
PETRUCHIO.
A herald, Kate? O! put me in thy books.
KATHERINA.
What is your crest? a coxcomb?
PETRUCHIO.
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
KATHERINA.
No cock of mine; you crow too like a craven.
PETRUCHIO.
Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.
KATHERINA.
It is my fashion when I see a crab.
PETRUCHIO.
Why, heres no crab, and therefore look not sour.
KATHERINA.
There is, there is.
PETRUCHIO.
Then show it me.
KATHERINA.
Had I a glass I would.
PETRUCHIO.
What, you mean my face?
KATHERINA.
Well aimd of such a young one.
PETRUCHIO.
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
KATHERINA.
Yet you are witherd.
PETRUCHIO.
Tis with cares.
KATHERINA.
I care not.
PETRUCHIO.
Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth, you scape not so.
KATHERINA.
I chafe you, if I tarry; let me go.
PETRUCHIO.
No, not a whit; I find you passing gentle.
Twas told me you were rough, and coy, and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar;
For thou art pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers.
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk;
But thou with mildness entertainst thy wooers;
With gentle conference, soft and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
O slandrous world! Kate like the hazel-twig
Is straight and slender, and as brown in hue
As hazel-nuts, and sweeter than the kernels.
O! let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt.
KATHERINA.
Go, fool, and whom thou keepst command.
PETRUCHIO.
Did ever Dian so become a grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
O! be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,
And then let Kate be chaste, and Dian sportful!
KATHERINA.
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
PETRUCHIO.
It is extempore, from my mother-wit.
KATHERINA.
A witty mother! witless else her son.
PETRUCHIO.
Am I not wise?
KATHERINA.
Yes; keep you warm.
PETRUCHIO.
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed;
And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife your dowry greed on;
And will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn;
For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me;
For I am he am born to tame you, Kate,
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates.
Re-enter Baptista, Gremio and Tranio.

Here comes your father. Never make denial;
I must and will have Katherine to my wife.
BAPTISTA.
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
PETRUCHIO.
How but well, sir? how but well?
It were impossible I should speed amiss.
BAPTISTA.
Why, how now, daughter Katherine, in your dumps?
KATHERINA.
Call you me daughter? Now I promise you
You have showd a tender fatherly regard
To wish me wed to one half lunatic,
A mad-cap ruffian and a swearing Jack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
PETRUCHIO.
Father, tis thus: yourself and all the world
That talkd of her have talkd amiss of her:
If she be curst, it is for policy,
For shes not froward, but modest as the dove;
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity;
And to conclude, we have greed so well together
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.
KATHERINA.
Ill see thee hangd on Sunday first.
GREMIO.
Hark, Petruchio; she says shell see thee hangd first.
TRANIO.
Is this your speeding? Nay, then good-night our part!
PETRUCHIO.
Be patient, gentlemen. I choose her for myself;
If she and I be pleasd, whats that to you?
Tis bargaind twixt us twain, being alone,
That she shall still be curst in company.
I tell you, tis incredible to believe
How much she loves me: O! the kindest Kate
She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twink she won me to her love.
O! you are novices: tis a world to see,
How tame, when men and women are alone,
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
Give me thy hand, Kate; I will unto Venice,
To buy apparel gainst the wedding-day.
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.
BAPTISTA.
I know not what to say; but give me your hands.
God send you joy, Petruchio! Tis a match.
GREMIO, TRANIO.
Amen, say we; we will be witnesses.
PETRUCHIO.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.
I will to Venice; Sunday comes apace;
We will have rings and things, and fine array;
And kiss me, Kate; we will be married o Sunday.
[Exeunt Petruchio and Katherina, severally.]

GREMIO.
Was ever match clappd up so suddenly?
BAPTISTA.
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchants part,
And venture madly on a desperate mart.
TRANIO.
Twas a commodity lay fretting by you;
Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
BAPTISTA.
The gain I seek is, quiet in the match.
GREMIO.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter:
Now is the day we long have looked for;
I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.
TRANIO.
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
GREMIO.
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.
TRANIO.
Greybeard, thy love doth freeze.
GREMIO.
But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back; tis age that nourisheth.
TRANIO.
But youth in ladies eyes that flourisheth.
BAPTISTA.
Content you, gentlemen; Ill compound this strife:
Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Shall have my Biancas love.
Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
GREMIO.
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold:
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuffd my crowns;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossd with pearl,
Valance of Venice gold in needlework;
Pewter and brass, and all things that belong
To house or housekeeping: then, at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am struck in years, I must confess;
And if I die tomorrow this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.
TRANIO.
That only came well in. Sir, list to me:
I am my fathers heir and only son;
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
Ill leave her houses three or four as good
Within rich Pisas walls as anyone
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua;
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.
What, have I pinchd you, Signior Gremio?
GREMIO.
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
My land amounts not to so much in all:
That she shall have, besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marseilles road.
What, have I chokd you with an argosy?
TRANIO.
Gremio, tis known my father hath no less
Than three great argosies, besides two galliasses,
And twelve tight galleys; these I will assure her,
And twice as much, whateer thou offerst next.
GREMIO.
Nay, I have offerd all; I have no more;
And she can have no more than all I have;
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
TRANIO.
Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,
By your firm promise; Gremio is out-vied.
BAPTISTA.
I must confess your offer is the best;
And let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own; else, you must pardon me;
If you should die before him, wheres her dower?
TRANIO.
Thats but a cavil; he is old, I young.
GREMIO.
And may not young men die as well as old?
BAPTISTA.
Well, gentlemen,
I am thus resolvd. On Sunday next, you know,
My daughter Katherine is to be married;
Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca
Be bride to you, if you make this assurance;
If not, to Signior Gremio.
And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
GREMIO.
Adieu, good neighbour.
[Exit Baptista.]

Now, I fear thee not:
Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table. Tut! a toy!
An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
[Exit.]

TRANIO.
A vengeance on your crafty witherd hide!
Yet I have facd it with a card of ten.
Tis in my head to do my master good:
I see no reason but supposd Lucentio
Must get a father, calld supposd Vincentio;
And thats a wonder: fathers commonly
Do get their children; but in this case of wooing
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
[Exit.]


ACT III
SCENE I. Padua. A room in BAPTISTAS house.
Enter Lucentio, Hortensio and Bianca.

LUCENTIO.
Fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir.
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katherine welcomed you withal?
HORTENSIO.
But, wrangling pedant, this is
The patroness of heavenly harmony:
Then give me leave to have prerogative;
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
LUCENTIO.
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
To know the cause why music was ordaind!
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
After his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
And while I pause serve in your harmony.
HORTENSIO.
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
BIANCA.
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong,
To strive for that which resteth in my choice.
I am no breeching scholar in the schools,
Ill not be tied to hours nor pointed times,
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down;
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles;
His lecture will be done ere you have tund.
HORTENSIO.
Youll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
[Retires.]

LUCENTIO.
That will be never: tune your instrument.
BIANCA.
Where left we last?
LUCENTIO.
Here, madam:
Hic ibat Simois; hic est Sigeia tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.
BIANCA.
Construe them.
LUCENTIO.
Hic ibat, as I told you before, Simois, I am Lucentio, hic est, son unto Vincentio of Pisa, Sigeia tellus, disguised thus to get your love, Hic steterat, and that Lucentio that comes a-wooing, Priami, is my man Tranio, regia, bearing my port, celsa senis, that we might beguile the old pantaloon.

HORTENSIO. [Returning.]
Madam, my instruments in tune.
BIANCA.
Lets hear.
[Hortensio plays.]

O fie! the treble jars.

LUCENTIO.
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
BIANCA.
Now let me see if I can construe it: Hic ibat Simois, I know you not; hic est Sigeia tellus, I trust you not; Hic steterat Priami, take heed he hear us not; regia, presume not; celsa senis, despair not.

HORTENSIO.
Madam, tis now in tune.
LUCENTIO.
All but the base.
HORTENSIO.
The base is right; tis the base knave that jars.
[Aside] How fiery and forward our pedant is!
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love:
Pedascule, Ill watch you better yet.
BIANCA.
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
LUCENTIO.
Mistrust it not; for sure, acides
Was Ajax, calld so from his grandfather.
BIANCA.
I must believe my master; else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt;
But let it rest. Now, Licio, to you.
Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
HORTENSIO.
[To Lucentio] You may go walk and give me leave a while;
My lessons make no music in three parts.
LUCENTIO.
Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait,
[Aside] And watch withal; for, but I be deceivd,
Our fine musician groweth amorous.
HORTENSIO.
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of art;
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy, and effectual,
Than hath been taught by any of my trade:
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
BIANCA.
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
HORTENSIO.
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.
BIANCA.
Gamut I am, the ground of all accord,
A re, to plead Hortensios passion;
B mi, Bianca, take him for thy lord,
C fa ut, that loves with all affection:
D sol re, one clef, two notes have I
E la mi, show pity or I die.
Call you this gamut? Tut, I like it not:
Old fashions please me best; I am not so nice,
To change true rules for odd inventions.
Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books,
And help to dress your sisters chamber up:
You know tomorrow is the wedding-day.
BIANCA.
Farewell, sweet masters, both: I must be gone.
[Exeunt Bianca and Servant.]

LUCENTIO.
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
[Exit.]

HORTENSIO.
But I have cause to pry into this pedant:
Methinks he looks as though he were in love.
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
To cast thy wandring eyes on every stale,
Seize thee that list: if once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
[Exit.]



SCENE II. The same. Before BAPTISTAS house.
Enter Baptista, Gremio, Tranio, Katherina, Bianca, Lucentio and Attendants.

BAPTISTA. [To Tranio.]
Signior Lucentio, this is the pointed day
That Katherine and Petruchio should be married,
And yet we hear not of our son-in-law.
What will be said? What mockery will it be
To want the bridegroom when the priest attends
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
KATHERINA.
No shame but mine; I must, forsooth, be forcd
To give my hand, opposd against my heart,
Unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen;
Who wood in haste and means to wed at leisure.
I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour;
And to be noted for a merry man,
Hell woo a thousand, point the day of marriage,
Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banns;
Yet never means to wed where he hath wood.
Now must the world point at poor Katherine,
And say Lo! there is mad Petruchios wife,
If it would please him come and marry her.
TRANIO.
Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word:
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
Though he be merry, yet withal hes honest.
KATHERINA.
Would Katherine had never seen him though!
[Exit weeping, followed by Bianca and others.]

BAPTISTA.
Go, girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep,
For such an injury would vex a very saint;
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.
Enter Biondello.

Master, master! News! old news, and such news as you never heard of!

BAPTISTA.
Is it new and old too? How may that be?
BIONDELLO.
Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchios coming?
BAPTISTA.
Is he come?
BIONDELLO.
Why, no, sir.
BAPTISTA.
What then?
BIONDELLO.
He is coming.
BAPTISTA.
When will he be here?
BIONDELLO.
When he stands where I am and sees you there.
TRANIO.
But say, what to thine old news?
BIONDELLO.
Why, Petruchio is coming, in a new hat and an old jerkin; a pair of old breeches thrice turned; a pair of boots that have been candle-cases, one buckled, another laced; an old rusty sword taen out of the town armoury, with a broken hilt, and chapeless; with two broken points: his horse hipped with an old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred; besides, possessed with the glanders and like to mose in the chine; troubled with the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of windgalls, sped with spavins, rayed with the yellows, past cure of the fives, stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten; near-legged before, and with a half-checked bit, and a head-stall of sheeps leather, which, being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often burst, and now repaired with knots; one girth six times pieced, and a womans crupper of velure, which hath two letters for her name fairly set down in studs, and here and there pieced with pack-thread.

BAPTISTA.
Who comes with him?
BIONDELLO.
O, sir! his lackey, for all the world caparisoned like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red and blue list; an old hat, and the humour of forty fancies prickd int for a feather: a monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian footboy or a gentlemans lackey.

TRANIO.
Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
Yet oftentimes lie goes but mean-apparelld.
BAPTISTA.
I am glad hes come, howsoeer he comes.
BIONDELLO.
Why, sir, he comes not.
BAPTISTA.
Didst thou not say he comes?
BIONDELLO.
Who? that Petruchio came?
BAPTISTA.
Ay, that Petruchio came.
BIONDELLO.
No, sir; I say his horse comes, with him on his back.
BAPTISTA.
Why, thats all one.
BIONDELLO.
Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny,
A horse and a man
Is more than one,
And yet not many.
Enter Petruchio and Grumio.

PETRUCHIO.
Come, where be these gallants? Who is at home?
BAPTISTA.
You are welcome, sir.
PETRUCHIO.
And yet I come not well.
BAPTISTA.
And yet you halt not.
TRANIO.
Not so well apparelld as I wish you were.

PETRUCHIO.
Were it better, I should rush in thus.
But where is Kate? Where is my lovely bride?
How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown;
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some comet or unusual prodigy?
BAPTISTA.
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day:
First were we sad, fearing you would not come;
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
Fie! doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival.
TRANIO.
And tell us what occasion of import
Hath all so long detaind you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike yourself?
PETRUCHIO.
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear;
Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,
Though in some part enforced to digress;
Which at more leisure I will so excuse
As you shall well be satisfied withal.
But where is Kate? I stay too long from her;
The morning wears, tis time we were at church.
TRANIO.
See not your bride in these unreverent robes;
Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
PETRUCHIO.
Not I, believe me: thus Ill visit her.
BAPTISTA.
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
PETRUCHIO.
Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha done with words;
To me shes married, not unto my clothes.
Could I repair what she will wear in me
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
Twere well for Kate and better for myself.
But what a fool am I to chat with you
When I should bid good morrow to my bride,
And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
[Exeunt Petruchio, Grumio and Biondello.]

TRANIO.
He hath some meaning in his mad attire.
We will persuade him, be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to church.
BAPTISTA.
Ill after him and see the event of this.
[Exeunt Baptista, Gremio and Attendants.]

TRANIO.
But, sir, to love concerneth us to add
Her fathers liking; which to bring to pass,
As I before imparted to your worship,
I am to get a man,whateer he be
It skills not much; well fit him to our turn,
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,
And make assurance here in Padua,
Of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
LUCENTIO.
Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
Doth watch Biancas steps so narrowly,
Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage;
Which once performd, let all the world say no,
Ill keep mine own despite of all the world.
TRANIO.
That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business.
Well over-reach the greybeard, Gremio,
The narrow-prying father, Minola,
The quaint musician, amorous Licio;
All for my masters sake, Lucentio.
Re-enter Gremio.

Signior Gremio, came you from the church?

GREMIO.
As willingly as eer I came from school.
TRANIO.
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
GREMIO.
A bridegroom, say you? Tis a groom indeed,
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
TRANIO.
Curster than she? Why, tis impossible.
GREMIO.
Why, hes a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
TRANIO.
Why, shes a devil, a devil, the devils dam.
GREMIO.
Tut! shes a lamb, a dove, a fool, to him.
Ill tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,
Ay, by gogs-wouns quoth he, and swore so loud
That, all amazd, the priest let fall the book;
And as he stoopd again to take it up,
The mad-braind bridegroom took him such a cuff
That down fell priest and book, and book and priest:
Now take them up, quoth he if any list.
TRANIO.
What said the wench, when he rose again?
GREMIO.
Trembled and shook, for why, he stampd and swore
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done,
He calls for wine: A health! quoth he, as if
He had been abroad, carousing to his mates
After a storm; quaffd off the muscadel,
And threw the sops all in the sextons face,
Having no other reason
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly
And seemd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck,
And kissd her lips with such a clamorous smack
That at the parting all the church did echo.
And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame;
And after me, I know, the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before.
Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.
[Music plays.]

Enter Petrucio, Katherina, Bianca, Baptista, Hortensio, Grumio and Train.

PETRUCHIO.
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains:
I know you think to dine with me today,
And have prepard great store of wedding cheer
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
BAPTISTA.
Ist possible you will away tonight?
PETRUCHIO.
I must away today before night come.
Make it no wonder: if you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go than stay.
And, honest company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away myself
To this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife.
Dine with my father, drink a health to me.
For I must hence; and farewell to you all.
TRANIO.
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
PETRUCHIO.
It may not be.
GREMIO.
Let me entreat you.
PETRUCHIO.
It cannot be.
KATHERINA.
Let me entreat you.
PETRUCHIO.
I am content.
KATHERINA.
Are you content to stay?
PETRUCHIO.
I am content you shall entreat me stay;
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
KATHERINA.
Now, if you love me, stay.
PETRUCHIO.
Grumio, my horse!
GRUMIO.
Ay, sir, they be ready; the oats have eaten the horses.
KATHERINA.
Nay, then,
Do what thou canst, I will not go today;
No, nor tomorrow, not till I please myself.
The door is open, sir; there lies your way;
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green;
For me, Ill not be gone till I please myself.
Tis like youll prove a jolly surly groom
That take it on you at the first so roundly.
PETRUCHIO.
O Kate! content thee: prithee be not angry.
KATHERINA.
I will be angry: what hast thou to do?
Father, be quiet; he shall stay my leisure.
GREMIO.
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
KATHERINA.
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner:
I see a woman may be made a fool,
If she had not a spirit to resist.
PETRUCHIO.
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
Obey the bride, you that attend on her;
Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves:
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
I will be master of what is mine own.
She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,
My household stuff, my field, my barn,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my anything;
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare;
Ill bring mine action on the proudest he
That stops my way in Padua. Grumio,
Draw forth thy weapon; we are beset with thieves;
Rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
Fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, Kate;
Ill buckler thee against a million.
[Exeunt Petrucio, Katherina and Grumio.]

BAPTISTA.
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
GREMIO.
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
TRANIO.
Of all mad matches, never was the like.
LUCENTIO.
Mistress, whats your opinion of your sister?
BIANCA.
That, being mad herself, shes madly mated.
GREMIO.
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
BAPTISTA.
Neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegrooms place;
And let Bianca take her sisters room.
TRANIO.
Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?
BAPTISTA.
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, lets go.
[Exeunt.]


ACT IV
SCENE I. A hall in PETRUCHIOS country house.
Enter Grumio.

GRUMIO.
Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and all foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? Was ever man so rayd? Was ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are coming after to warm them. Now, were not I a little pot and soon hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me. But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself; for, considering the weather, a taller man than I will take cold. Holla, ho! Curtis!

Enter Curtis.

CURTIS.
Who is that calls so coldly?
GRUMIO.
A piece of ice: if thou doubt it, thou mayst slide from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck. A fire, good Curtis.

CURTIS.
Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?
GRUMIO.
O, ay! Curtis, ay; and therefore fire, fire; cast on no water.

CURTIS.
Is she so hot a shrew as shes reported?
GRUMIO.
She was, good Curtis, before this frost; but thou knowest winter tames man, woman, and beast; for it hath tamed my old master, and my new mistress, and myself, fellow Curtis.

CURTIS.
Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.
GRUMIO.
Am I but three inches? Why, thy horn is a foot; and so long am I at the least. But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress, whose hand,she being now at hand, thou shalt soon feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office?

CURTIS.
I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?
GRUMIO.
A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine; and therefore fire. Do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.

CURTIS.
Theres fire ready; and therefore, good Grumio, the news.
GRUMIO.
Why, Jack boy! ho, boy! and as much news as wilt thou.
CURTIS.
Come, you are so full of cony-catching.
GRUMIO.
Why, therefore, fire; for I have caught extreme cold. Wheres the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept, the servingmen in their new fustian, their white stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment on? Be the Jacks fair within, the Jills fair without, and carpets laid, and everything in order?

CURTIS.
All ready; and therefore, I pray thee, news.
GRUMIO.
First, know my horse is tired; my master and mistress fallen out.
CURTIS.
How?
GRUMIO.
Out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby hangs a tale.
CURTIS.
Lets hat, good Grumio.
GRUMIO.
Lend thine ear.
CURTIS.
Here.
GRUMIO.
[Striking him.] There.
CURTIS.
This tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
GRUMIO.
And therefore tis called a sensible tale; and this cuff was but to knock at your ear and beseech listening. Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress,

CURTIS.
Both of one horse?
GRUMIO.
Whats that to thee?
CURTIS.
Why, a horse.
GRUMIO.
Tell thou the tale: but hadst thou not crossed me, thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell, and she under her horse; thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place, how she was bemoiled; how he left her with the horse upon her; how he beat me because her horse stumbled; how she waded through the dirt to pluck him off me: how he swore; how she prayed, that never prayed before; how I cried; how the horses ran away; how her bridle was burst; how I lost my crupper; with many things of worthy memory, which now shall die in oblivion, and thou return unexperienced to thy grave.

CURTIS.
By this reckoning he is more shrew than she.
GRUMIO.
Ay; and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home. But what talk I of this? Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the rest; let their heads be sleekly combed, their blue coats brushd and their garters of an indifferent knit; let them curtsy with their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my masters horse-tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?

CURTIS.
They are.
GRUMIO.
Call them forth.
CURTIS.
Do you hear? ho! You must meet my master to countenance my mistress.

GRUMIO.
Why, she hath a face of her own.
CURTIS.
Who knows not that?
GRUMIO.
Thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.
CURTIS.
I call them forth to credit her.
GRUMIO.
Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.
Enter four or five Servants.

NATHANIEL.
Welcome home, Grumio!
PHILIP.
How now, Grumio!
JOSEPH.
What, Grumio!
NICHOLAS.
Fellow Grumio!
NATHANIEL.
How now, old lad!
GRUMIO.
Welcome, you; how now, you; what, you; fellow, you; and thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce companions, is all ready, and all things neat?

NATHANIEL.
All things is ready. How near is our master?
GRUMIO.
Een at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be not,
Cocks passion, silence! I hear my master.
Enter Petrucio and Katherina.

PETRUCHIO.
Where be these knaves? What! no man at door
To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse?
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?
ALL SERVANTS.
Here, here, sir; here, sir.
PETRUCHIO.
Here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!
You logger-headed and unpolishd grooms!
What, no attendance? no regard? no duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
GRUMIO.
Here, sir; as foolish as I was before.
PETRUCHIO.
You peasant swain! you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
GRUMIO.
Nathaniels coat, sir, was not fully made,
And Gabriels pumps were all unpinkd i the heel;
There was no link to colour Peters hat,
And Walters dagger was not come from sheathing;
There was none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory;
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly;
Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
PETRUCHIO.
Go, rascals, go and fetch my supper in.
[Exeunt some of the Servants.]

Where is the life that late I led?
Where are those? Sit down, Kate, and welcome.
Food, food, food, food!
Re-enter Servants with supper.

Why, when, I say?Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.
Off with my boots, you rogues! you villains! when?
It was the friar of orders grey,
As he forth walked on his way:
Out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry:
[Strikes him.]

Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.
Be merry, Kate. Some water, here; what, ho!
Wheres my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither:
[Exit Servant.]

One, Kate, that you must kiss and be acquainted with.
Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.
[Servant lets the ewer fall. Petruchio strikes him.]

You whoreson villain! will you let it fall?

KATHERINA.
Patience, I pray you; twas a fault unwilling.
PETRUCHIO.
A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-eard knave!
Come, Kate, sit down; I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?
Whats this? Mutton?
FIRST SERVANT.
Ay.
PETRUCHIO.
Who brought it?
PETER.
I.

PETRUCHIO.
Tis burnt; and so is all the meat.
What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser,
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
[Throws the meat, etc., at them.]

There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all.
You heedless joltheads and unmannerd slaves!
What! do you grumble? Ill be with you straight.
KATHERINA.
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet;
The meat was well, if you were so contented.
PETRUCHIO.
I tell thee, Kate, twas burnt and dried away,
And I expressly am forbid to touch it;
For it engenders choler, planteth anger;
And better twere that both of us did fast,
Since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
Be patient; tomorrow t shall be mended.
And for this night well fast for company:
Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
[Exeunt Petruchio, Katherina and Curtis.]

NATHANIEL.
Peter, didst ever see the like?
PETER.
He kills her in her own humour.
Re-enter Curtis.

GRUMIO.
Where is he?
CURTIS.
In her chamber, making a sermon of continency to her;
And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,
And sits as one new risen from a dream.
Away, away! for he is coming hither.
[Exeunt.]

Re-enter Petruchio.

PETRUCHIO.
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
And tis my hope to end successfully.
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty.
And till she stoop she must not be full-gorgd,
For then she never looks upon her lure.
Another way I have to man my haggard,
To make her come, and know her keepers call,
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
That bate and beat, and will not be obedient.
She eat no meat today, nor none shall eat;
Last night she slept not, nor tonight she shall not;
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
Ill find about the making of the bed;
And here Ill fling the pillow, there the bolster,
This way the coverlet, another way the sheets;
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
That all is done in reverend care of her;
And, in conclusion, she shall watch all night:
And if she chance to nod Ill rail and brawl,
And with the clamour keep her still awake.
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness;
And thus Ill curb her mad and headstrong humour.
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak; tis charity to show.
[Exit.]



SCENE II. Padua. Before BAPTISTAS house.
Enter Tranio and Hortensio.

TRANIO.
Is t possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
HORTENSIO.
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
[They stand aside.]

Enter Bianca and Lucentio.

LUCENTIO.
Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
BIANCA.
What, master, read you? First resolve me that.
LUCENTIO.
I read that I profess, The Art to Love.
BIANCA.
And may you prove, sir, master of your art!
LUCENTIO.
While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart.
[They retire.]

HORTENSIO.
Quick proceeders, marry! Now tell me, I pray,
You that durst swear that your Mistress Bianca
Lovd none in the world so well as Lucentio.
TRANIO.
O despiteful love! unconstant womankind!
I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.
HORTENSIO.
Mistake no more; I am not Licio.
Nor a musician as I seem to be;
But one that scorn to live in this disguise
For such a one as leaves a gentleman
And makes a god of such a cullion:
Know, sir, that I am calld Hortensio.
TRANIO.
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca;
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
HORTENSIO.
See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her more, but do forswear her,
As one unworthy all the former favours
That I have fondly flatterd her withal.
TRANIO.
And here I take the like unfeigned oath,
Never to marry with her though she would entreat;
Fie on her! See how beastly she doth court him!
HORTENSIO.
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
I will be married to a wealthy widow
Ere three days pass, which hath as long lovd me
As I have lovd this proud disdainful haggard.
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
Shall win my love; and so I take my leave,
In resolution as I swore before.
[Exit Hortensio. Lucentio and Bianca advance.]

TRANIO.
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
As longeth to a lovers blessed case!
Nay, I have taen you napping, gentle love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
BIANCA.
Tranio, you jest; but have you both forsworn me?
TRANIO.
Mistress, we have.
LUCENTIO.
Then we are rid of Licio.
TRANIO.
I faith, hell have a lusty widow now,
That shall be wood and wedded in a day.
BIANCA.
God give him joy!
TRANIO.
Ay, and hell tame her.
BIANCA.
He says so, Tranio.
TRANIO.
Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
BIANCA.
The taming-school! What, is there such a place?
TRANIO.
Ay, mistress; and Petruchio is the master,
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
Enter Biondello, running.

BIONDELLO.
O master, master! I have watchd so long
That I am dog-weary; but at last I spied
An ancient angel coming down the hill
Will serve the turn.
TRANIO.
What is he, Biondello?
BIONDELLO.
Master, a mercatante or a pedant,
I know not what; but formal in apparel,
In gait and countenance surely like a father.
LUCENTIO.
And what of him, Tranio?
TRANIO.
If he be credulous and trust my tale,
Ill make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola,
As if he were the right Vincentio.
Take in your love, and then let me alone.
[Exeunt Lucentio and Bianca.]

Enter a Pedant.

PEDANT.
God save you, sir!
TRANIO.
And you, sir! you are welcome.
Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
PEDANT.
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two;
But then up farther, and as far as Rome;
And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.
TRANIO.
What countryman, I pray?
PEDANT.
Of Mantua.
TRANIO.
Of Mantua, sir? Marry, God forbid,
And come to Padua, careless of your life!
PEDANT.
My life, sir! How, I pray? for that goes hard.
TRANIO.
Tis death for anyone in Mantua
To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
Your ships are stayd at Venice; and the Duke,
For private quarrel twixt your Duke and him,
Hath publishd and proclaimd it openly.
Tis marvel, but that you are but newly come
You might have heard it else proclaimd about.
PEDANT.
Alas, sir! it is worse for me than so;
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence, and must here deliver them.
TRANIO.
Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
This will I do, and this I will advise you:
First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
PEDANT.
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
Pisa renowned for grave citizens.
TRANIO.
Among them know you one Vincentio?
PEDANT.
I know him not, but I have heard of him,
A merchant of incomparable wealth.
TRANIO.
He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
In countenance somewhat doth resemble you.
BIONDELLO.
[Aside.] As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all one.
TRANIO.
To save your life in this extremity,
This favour will I do you for his sake;
And think it not the worst of all your fortunes
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodgd;
Look that you take upon you as you should!
You understand me, sir; so shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the city.
If this be courtesy, sir, accept of it.
PEDANT.
O, sir, I do; and will repute you ever
The patron of my life and liberty.
TRANIO.
Then go with me to make the matter good.
This, by the way, I let you understand:
My father is here lookd for every day
To pass assurance of a dower in marriage
Twixt me and one Baptistas daughter here:
In all these circumstances Ill instruct you.
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
[Exeunt.]



SCENE III. A room in PETRUCHIOS house.
Enter Katherina and Grumio.

GRUMIO.
No, no, forsooth; I dare not for my life.
KATHERINA.
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars that come unto my fathers door
Upon entreaty have a present alms;
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity;
But I, who never knew how to entreat,
Nor never needed that I should entreat,
Am starvd for meat, giddy for lack of sleep;
With oaths kept waking, and with brawling fed.
And that which spites me more than all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love;
As who should say, if I should sleep or eat
Twere deadly sickness, or else present death.
I prithee go and get me some repast;
I care not what, so it be wholesome food.
GRUMIO.
What say you to a neats foot?
KATHERINA.
Tis passing good; I prithee let me have it.
GRUMIO.
I fear it is too choleric a meat.
How say you to a fat tripe finely broild?
KATHERINA.
I like it well; good Grumio, fetch it me.
GRUMIO.
I cannot tell; I fear tis choleric.
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
KATHERINA.
A dish that I do love to feed upon.
GRUMIO.
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
KATHERINA.
Why then the beef, and let the mustard rest.
GRUMIO.
Nay, then I will not: you shall have the mustard,
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.
KATHERINA.
Then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.
GRUMIO.
Why then the mustard without the beef.
KATHERINA.
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
[Beats him.]

That feedst me with the very name of meat.
Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you
That triumph thus upon my misery!
Go, get thee gone, I say.
Enter Petruchio with a dish of meat; and Hortensio.

PETRUCHIO.
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?
HORTENSIO.
Mistress, what cheer?
KATHERINA.
Faith, as cold as can be.
PETRUCHIO.
Pluck up thy spirits; look cheerfully upon me.
Here, love; thou seest how diligent I am,
To dress thy meat myself, and bring it thee:
[Sets the dish on a table.]

I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
What! not a word? Nay, then thou lovst it not,
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
Here, take away this dish.
KATHERINA.
I pray you, let it stand.
PETRUCHIO.
The poorest service is repaid with thanks;
And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
KATHERINA.
I thank you, sir.
HORTENSIO.
Signior Petruchio, fie! you are to blame.
Come, Mistress Kate, Ill bear you company.
PETRUCHIO.
[Aside.] Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.
Much good do it unto thy gentle heart!
Kate, eat apace: and now, my honey love,
Will we return unto thy fathers house
And revel it as bravely as the best,
With silken coats and caps, and golden rings,
With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things;
With scarfs and fans and double change of bravery,
With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knavery.
What! hast thou dind? The tailor stays thy leisure,
To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
Enter Tailor.

Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments;
Lay forth the gown.
Enter Haberdasher.

What news with you, sir?

HABERDASHER.
Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.
PETRUCHIO.
Why, this was moulded on a porringer;
A velvet dish: fie, fie! tis lewd and filthy:
Why, tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,
A knack, a toy, a trick, a babys cap:
Away with it! come, let me have a bigger.
KATHERINA.
Ill have no bigger; this doth fit the time,
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
PETRUCHIO.
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then.
HORTENSIO.
[Aside] That will not be in haste.
KATHERINA.
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;
And speak I will. I am no child, no babe.
Your betters have endurd me say my mind,
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart, concealing it, will break;
And rather than it shall, I will be free
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
PETRUCHIO.
Why, thou sayst true; it is a paltry cap,
A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie;
I love thee well in that thou likst it not.
KATHERINA.
Love me or love me not, I like the cap;
And it I will have, or I will have none.
[Exit Haberdasher.]

PETRUCHIO.
Thy gown? Why, ay: come, tailor, let us seet.
O mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here?
Whats this? A sleeve? Tis like a demi-cannon.
What, up and down, carvd like an apple tart?
Heres snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,
Like to a censer in a barbers shop.
Why, what i devils name, tailor, callst thou this?
HORTENSIO.
[Aside] I see shes like to have neither cap nor gown.
TAILOR.
You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion and the time.
PETRUCHIO.
Marry, and did; but if you be rememberd,
I did not bid you mar it to the time.
Go, hop me over every kennel home,
For you shall hop without my custom, sir.
Ill none of it: hence! make your best of it.
KATHERINA.
I never saw a better fashiond gown,
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable;
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
PETRUCHIO.
Why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.
TAILOR.
She says your worship means to make a puppet of her.
PETRUCHIO.
O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread,
Thou thimble,
Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou!
Bravd in mine own house with a skein of thread!
Away! thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant,
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou livst!
I tell thee, I, that thou hast marrd her gown.
TAILOR.
Your worship is deceivd: the gown is made
Just as my master had direction.
Grumio gave order how it should be done.
GRUMIO.
I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.
TAILOR.
But how did you desire it should be made?
GRUMIO.
Marry, sir, with needle and thread.
TAILOR.
But did you not request to have it cut?
GRUMIO.
Thou hast faced many things.
TAILOR.
I have.

GRUMIO.
Face not me. Thou hast braved many men; brave not me: I will neither be facd nor bravd. I say unto thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown; but I did not bid him cut it to pieces: ergo, thou liest.

TAILOR.
Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
PETRUCHIO.
Read it.
GRUMIO.
The note lies in s throat, if he say I said so.
TAILOR.
Imprimis, a loose-bodied gown.
GRUMIO.
Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the skirts of it and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread; I said, a gown.

PETRUCHIO.
Proceed.
TAILOR.
With a small compassed cape.
GRUMIO.
I confess the cape.
TAILOR.
With a trunk sleeve.
GRUMIO.
I confess two sleeves.
TAILOR.
The sleeves curiously cut.
PETRUCHIO.
Ay, theres the villainy.
GRUMIO.
Error i the bill, sir; error i the bill. I commanded the sleeves should be cut out, and sewd up again; and that Ill prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.

TAILOR.
This is true that I say; and I had thee in place where thou shouldst know it.

GRUMIO.
I am for thee straight; take thou the bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me.

HORTENSIO.
God-a-mercy, Grumio! Then he shall have no odds.
PETRUCHIO.
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
GRUMIO.
You are i the right, sir; tis for my mistress.
PETRUCHIO.
Go, take it up unto thy masters use.
GRUMIO.
Villain, not for thy life! Take up my mistress gown for thy masters use!

PETRUCHIO.
Why, sir, whats your conceit in that?
GRUMIO.
O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for.
Take up my mistress gown to his masters use!
O fie, fie, fie!
PETRUCHIO.
[Aside] Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.
[To Tailor.] Go take it hence; be gone, and say no more.
HORTENSIO.
[Aside to Tailor.] Tailor, Ill pay thee for thy gown tomorrow;
Take no unkindness of his hasty words.
Away, I say! commend me to thy master.
[Exit Tailor.]

PETRUCHIO.
Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your fathers
Even in these honest mean habiliments.
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor
For tis the mind that makes the body rich;
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
So honour peereth in the meanest habit.
What, is the jay more precious than the lark
Because his feathers are more beautiful?
Or is the adder better than the eel
Because his painted skin contents the eye?
O no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
For this poor furniture and mean array.
If thou accountst it shame, lay it on me;
And therefore frolic; we will hence forthwith,
To feast and sport us at thy fathers house.
Go call my men, and let us straight to him;
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.
Lets see; I think tis now some seven oclock,
And well we may come there by dinner-time.
KATHERINA.
I dare assure you, sir, tis almost two,
And twill be supper-time ere you come there.
PETRUCHIO.
It shall be seven ere I go to horse.
Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,
You are still crossing it. Sirs, let t alone:
I will not go today; and ere I do,
It shall be what oclock I say it is.
HORTENSIO.
Why, so this gallant will command the sun.
[Exeunt.]



SCENE IV. Padua. Before BAPTISTAS house.
Enter Tranio and the Pedant dressed like Vincentio

TRANIO.
Sir, this is the house; please it you that I call?
PEDANT.
Ay, what else? and, but I be deceived,
Signior Baptista may remember me,
Near twenty years ago in Genoa,
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
TRANIO.
Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
With such austerity as longeth to a father.
PEDANT.
I warrant you. But, sir, here comes your boy;
Twere good he were schoold.
Enter Biondello.

TRANIO.
Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.
Imagine twere the right Vincentio.
BIONDELLO.
Tut! fear not me.
TRANIO.
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
BIONDELLO.
I told him that your father was at Venice,
And that you lookd for him this day in Padua.
TRANIO.
Thart a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir.
Enter Baptista and Lucentio.

Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
[To the Pedant] Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of;
I pray you stand good father to me now;
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
PEDANT.
Soft, son!
Sir, by your leave: having come to Padua
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love between your daughter and himself:
And,for the good report I hear of you,
And for the love he beareth to your daughter,
And she to him,to stay him not too long,
I am content, in a good fathers care,
To have him matchd; and, if you please to like
No worse than I, upon some agreement
Me shall you find ready and willing
With one consent to have her so bestowd;
For curious I cannot be with you,
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
BAPTISTA.
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say.
Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
Right true it is your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter, and she loveth him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections;
And therefore, if you say no more than this,
That like a father you will deal with him,
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
The match is made, and all is done:
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
TRANIO.
I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best
We be affied, and such assurance taen
As shall with either parts agreement stand?
BAPTISTA.
Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants;
Besides, old Gremio is hearkening still,
And happily we might be interrupted.
TRANIO.
Then at my lodging, and it like you:
There doth my father lie; and there this night
Well pass the business privately and well.
Send for your daughter by your servant here;
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
The worst is this, that at so slender warning
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
BAPTISTA.
It likes me well. Cambio, hie you home,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
And, if you will, tell what hath happened:
Lucentios father is arrivd in Padua,
And how shes like to be Lucentios wife.
LUCENTIO.
I pray the gods she may, with all my heart!
TRANIO.
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Welcome! One mess is like to be your cheer;
Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa.
BAPTISTA.
I follow you.
[Exeunt Tranio, Pedant and Baptista.]

BIONDELLO.
Cambio!
LUCENTIO.
What sayst thou, Biondello?
BIONDELLO.
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
LUCENTIO.
Biondello, what of that?
BIONDELLO.
Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.

LUCENTIO.
I pray thee moralize them.
BIONDELLO.
Then thus: Baptista is safe, talking with the deceiving father of a deceitful son.

LUCENTIO.
And what of him?
BIONDELLO.
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
LUCENTIO.
And then?
BIONDELLO.
The old priest at Saint Lukes church is at your command at all hours.

LUCENTIO.
And what of all this?
BIONDELLO.
I cannot tell, except they are busied about a counterfeit assurance. Take your assurance of her, cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum; to the church! take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient honest witnesses.
If this be not that you look for, I have more to say,
But bid Bianca farewell for ever and a day.
[Going.]

LUCENTIO.
Hearst thou, Biondello?
BIONDELLO.
I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and so may you, sir; and so adieu, sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint Lukes to bid the priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix.

[Exit.]

LUCENTIO.
I may, and will, if she be so contented.
She will be pleasd; then wherefore should I doubt?
Hap what hap may, Ill roundly go about her;
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her:
[Exit.]



SCENE V. A public road.
Enter Petruchio, Katherina, Hortensio and Servants.

PETRUCHIO.
Come on, i Gods name; once more toward our fathers.
Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
KATHERINA.
The moon! The sun; it is not moonlight now.
PETRUCHIO.
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
KATHERINA.
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
PETRUCHIO.
Now by my mothers son, and thats myself,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or ere I journey to your fathers house.
Go on and fetch our horses back again.
Evermore crossd and crossd; nothing but crossd!
HORTENSIO.
Say as he says, or we shall never go.
KATHERINA.
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please;
And if you please to call it a rush-candle,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
PETRUCHIO.
I say it is the moon.
KATHERINA.
I know it is the moon.
PETRUCHIO.
Nay, then you lie; it is the blessed sun.
KATHERINA.
Then, God be blessd, it is the blessed sun;
But sun it is not when you say it is not,
And the moon changes even as your mind.
What you will have it namd, even that it is,
And so it shall be so for Katherine.
HORTENSIO.
Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.
PETRUCHIO.
Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the bias.
But, soft! Company is coming here.
Enter Vincentio, in a travelling dress.

[To Vincentio] Good morrow, gentle mistress; where away?
Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beautys sake.
HORTENSIO.
A will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
KATHERINA.
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
Whither away, or where is thy abode?
Happy the parents of so fair a child;
Happier the man whom favourable stars
Allot thee for his lovely bedfellow.
PETRUCHIO.
Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad:
This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, witherd,
And not a maiden, as thou sayst he is.
KATHERINA.
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
That have been so bedazzled with the sun
That everything I look on seemeth green:
Now I perceive thou art a reverend father;
Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
PETRUCHIO.
Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known
Which way thou travellest: if along with us,
We shall be joyful of thy company.
VINCENTIO.
Fair sir, and you my merry mistress,
That with your strange encounter much amazd me,
My name is called Vincentio; my dwelling Pisa;
And bound I am to Padua, there to visit
A son of mine, which long I have not seen.
PETRUCHIO.
What is his name?
VINCENTIO.
Lucentio, gentle sir.
PETRUCHIO.
Happily met; the happier for thy son.
And now by law, as well as reverend age,
I may entitle thee my loving father:
The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,
Nor be not grievd: she is of good esteem,
Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified as may beseem
The spouse of any noble gentleman.
Let me embrace with old Vincentio;
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
VINCENTIO.
But is this true? or is it else your pleasure,
Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
Upon the company you overtake?
HORTENSIO.
I do assure thee, father, so it is.
PETRUCHIO.
Come, go along, and see the truth hereof;
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
[Exeunt all but Hortensio.]

HORTENSIO.
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.
Have to my widow! and if she be froward,
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.
[Exit.]


ACT V
SCENE I. Padua. Before LUCENTIOS house.
Enter on one side Biondello, Lucentio and Bianca; Gremio walking on other side.

BIONDELLO.
Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
LUCENTIO.
I fly, Biondello; but they may chance to need thee at home, therefore leave us.

BIONDELLO.
Nay, faith, Ill see the church o your back; and then come back to my masters as soon as I can.

[Exeunt Lucentio, Bianca and Biondello.]

GREMIO.
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
Enter Petruchio, Katherina, Vincentio and Attendants.

PETRUCHIO.
Sir, heres the door; this is Lucentios house:
My fathers bears more toward the market-place;
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
VINCENTIO.
You shall not choose but drink before you go.
I think I shall command your welcome here,
And by all likelihood some cheer is toward.
[Knocks.]

GREMIO.
Theyre busy within; you were best knock louder.
Enter Pedant above, at a window.

PEDANT.
Whats he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
VINCENTIO.
Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?
PEDANT.
Hes within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
VINCENTIO.
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal?

PEDANT.
Keep your hundred pounds to yourself: he shall need none so long as I live.

PETRUCHIO.
Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua. Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances, I pray you tell Signior Lucentio that his father is come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.

PEDANT.
Thou liest: his father is come from Padua, and here looking out at the window.

VINCENTIO.
Art thou his father?
PEDANT.
Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may believe her.
PETRUCHIO.
[To Vincentio] Why, how now, gentleman! why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another mans name.

PEDANT.
Lay hands on the villain: I believe a means to cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.

Re-enter Biondello.

BIONDELLO.
I have seen them in the church together: God send em good shipping! But who is here? Mine old master, Vincentio! Now we are undone and brought to nothing.

VINCENTIO.
[Seeing Biondello.] Come hither, crack-hemp.
BIONDELLO.
I hope I may choose, sir.
VINCENTIO.
Come hither, you rogue. What, have you forgot me?
BIONDELLO.
Forgot you! No, sir: I could not forget you, for I never saw you before in all my life.

VINCENTIO.
What, you notorious villain! didst thou never see thy masters father, Vincentio?

BIONDELLO.
What, my old worshipful old master? Yes, marry, sir; see where he looks out of the window.

VINCENTIO.
Ist so, indeed?
[He beats Biondello.]

BIONDELLO.
Help, help, help! heres a madman will murder me.
[Exit.]

PEDANT.
Help, son! help, Signior Baptista!
[Exit from the window.]

PETRUCHIO.
Prithee, Kate, lets stand aside and see the end of this controversy.

[They retire.]

Re-enter Pedant, below; Baptista, Tranio and Servants.

TRANIO.
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
VINCENTIO.
What am I, sir! nay, what are you, sir? O immortal gods! O fine villain! A silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet cloak, and a copatain hat! O, I am undone! I am undone! While I play the good husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at the university.

TRANIO.
How now! whats the matter?
BAPTISTA.
What, is the man lunatic?
TRANIO.
Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit, but your words show you a madman. Why, sir, what cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.

VINCENTIO.
Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
BAPTISTA.
You mistake, sir; you mistake, sir. Pray, what do you think is his name?

VINCENTIO.
His name! As if I knew not his name! I have brought him up ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.

PEDANT.
Away, away, mad ass! His name is Lucentio; and he is mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.

VINCENTIO.
Lucentio! O, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold on him, I charge you, in the Dukes name. O, my son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son, Lucentio?

TRANIO.
Call forth an officer.
Enter one with an Officer.

Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista, I charge you see that he be forthcoming.

VINCENTIO.
Carry me to the gaol!
GREMIO.
Stay, officer; he shall not go to prison.
BAPTISTA.
Talk not, Signior Gremio; I say he shall go to prison.
GREMIO.
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catched in this business; I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.

PEDANT.
Swear if thou darest.
GREMIO.
Nay, I dare not swear it.
TRANIO.
Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.
GREMIO.
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
BAPTISTA.
Away with the dotard! to the gaol with him!
VINCENTIO.
Thus strangers may be haled and abusd: O monstrous villain!

Re-enter Biondello, with Lucentio and Bianca.

BIONDELLO.
O! we are spoiled; and yonder he is: deny him, forswear him, or else we are all undone.

LUCENTIO.
[Kneeling.] Pardon, sweet father.
VINCENTIO.
Lives my sweetest son?
[Biondello, Tranio and Pedant run out.]

BIANCA.
[Kneeling.] Pardon, dear father.
BAPTISTA.
How hast thou offended?
Where is Lucentio?
LUCENTIO.
Heres Lucentio,
Right son to the right Vincentio;
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit supposes bleard thine eyne.
GREMIO.
Here s packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
VINCENTIO.
Where is that damned villain, Tranio,
That facd and bravd me in this matter so?
BAPTISTA.
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
BIANCA.
Cambio is changd into Lucentio.
LUCENTIO.
Love wrought these miracles. Biancas love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town;
And happily I have arrivd at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
What Tranio did, myself enforcd him to;
Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
VINCENTIO.
Ill slit the villains nose that would have sent me to the gaol.

BAPTISTA.
[To Lucentio.] But do you hear, sir? Have you married my daughter without asking my good will?

VINCENTIO.
Fear not, Baptista; we will content you, go to: but I will in, to be revenged for this villainy.

[Exit.]

BAPTISTA.
And I to sound the depth of this knavery.
[Exit.]

LUCENTIO.
Look not pale, Bianca; thy father will not frown.
[Exeunt Lucentio and Bianca.]

GREMIO.
My cake is dough, but Ill in among the rest;
Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.
[Exit.]

Petruchio and Katherina advance.

KATHERINA.
Husband, lets follow to see the end of this ado.
PETRUCHIO.
First kiss me, Kate, and we will.
KATHERINA.
What! in the midst of the street?
PETRUCHIO.
What! art thou ashamed of me?
KATHERINA.
No, sir; God forbid; but ashamed to kiss.
PETRUCHIO.
Why, then, lets home again. Come, sirrah, lets away.
KATHERINA.
Nay, I will give thee a kiss: now pray thee, love, stay.
PETRUCHIO.
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate:
Better once than never, for never too late.
[Exeunt.]



SCENE II. A room in LUCENTIOS house.
Enter Baptista, Vincentio, Gremio, the Pedant, Lucentio, Bianca, Petruchio, Katherina, Hortensio and Widow. Tranio, Biondello and Grumio and Others, attending.

LUCENTIO.
At last, though long, our jarring notes agree:
And time it is when raging war is done,
To smile at scapes and perils overblown.
My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.
Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina,
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house:
My banquet is to close our stomachs up,
After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down;
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.
[They sit at table.]

PETRUCHIO.
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
BAPTISTA.
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
PETRUCHIO.
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
HORTENSIO.
For both our sakes I would that word were true.
PETRUCHIO.
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.
WIDOW.
Then never trust me if I be afeard.
PETRUCHIO.
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
I mean Hortensio is afeard of you.
WIDOW.
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
PETRUCHIO.
Roundly replied.
KATHERINA.
Mistress, how mean you that?
WIDOW.
Thus I conceive by him.
PETRUCHIO.
Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?
HORTENSIO.
My widow says thus she conceives her tale.
PETRUCHIO.
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.
KATHERINA.
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round:
I pray you tell me what you meant by that.
WIDOW.
Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
Measures my husbands sorrow by his woe;
And now you know my meaning.
KATHERINA.
A very mean meaning.
WIDOW.
Right, I mean you.
KATHERINA.
And I am mean, indeed, respecting you.
PETRUCHIO.
To her, Kate!
HORTENSIO.
To her, widow!
PETRUCHIO.
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.
HORTENSIO.
Thats my office.
PETRUCHIO.
Spoke like an officer: ha to thee, lad.
[Drinks to Hortensio.]

BAPTISTA.
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
GREMIO.
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
BIANCA.
Head and butt! An hasty-witted body
Would say your head and butt were head and horn.
VINCENTIO.
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakend you?
BIANCA.
Ay, but not frighted me; therefore Ill sleep again.
PETRUCHIO.
Nay, that you shall not; since you have begun,
Have at you for a bitter jest or two.
BIANCA.
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
You are welcome all.
[Exeunt Bianca, Katherina and Widow.]

PETRUCHIO.
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio;
This bird you aimd at, though you hit her not:
Therefore a health to all that shot and missd.
TRANIO.
O, sir! Lucentio slippd me like his greyhound,
Which runs himself, and catches for his master.
PETRUCHIO.
A good swift simile, but something currish.
TRANIO.
Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself:
Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
BAPTISTA.
O ho, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.
LUCENTIO.
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
HORTENSIO.
Confess, confess; hath he not hit you here?
PETRUCHIO.
A has a little galld me, I confess;
And as the jest did glance away from me,
Tis ten to one it maimd you two outright.
BAPTISTA.
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
PETRUCHIO.
Well, I say no; and therefore, for assurance,
Lets each one send unto his wife,
And he whose wife is most obedient,
To come at first when he doth send for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propose.
HORTENSIO.
Content. Whats the wager?
LUCENTIO.
Twenty crowns.
PETRUCHIO.
Twenty crowns!
Ill venture so much of my hawk or hound,
But twenty times so much upon my wife.
LUCENTIO.
A hundred then.
HORTENSIO.
Content.
PETRUCHIO.
A match! tis done.
HORTENSIO.
Who shall begin?
LUCENTIO.
That will I.
Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
BIONDELLO.
I go.
[Exit.]

BAPTISTA.
Son, Ill be your half, Bianca comes.
LUCENTIO.
Ill have no halves; Ill bear it all myself.
Re-enter Biondello.

How now! what news?

BIONDELLO.
Sir, my mistress sends you word
That she is busy and she cannot come.
PETRUCHIO.
How! Shes busy, and she cannot come!
Is that an answer?
GREMIO.
Ay, and a kind one too:
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
PETRUCHIO.
I hope better.
HORTENSIO.
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife
To come to me forthwith.
[Exit Biondello.]

PETRUCHIO.
O, ho! entreat her!
Nay, then she must needs come.
HORTENSIO.
I am afraid, sir,
Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
Re-enter Biondello.

Now, wheres my wife?

BIONDELLO.
She says you have some goodly jest in hand:
She will not come; she bids you come to her.
PETRUCHIO.
Worse and worse; she will not come! O vile,
Intolerable, not to be endurd!
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress,
Say I command her come to me.
[Exit Grumio.]

HORTENSIO.
I know her answer.
PETRUCHIO.
What?
HORTENSIO.
She will not.
PETRUCHIO.
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
Re-enter Katherina.

BAPTISTA.
Now, by my holidame, here comes Katherina!
KATHERINA.
What is your will sir, that you send for me?
PETRUCHIO.
Where is your sister, and Hortensios wife?
KATHERINA.
They sit conferring by the parlour fire.
PETRUCHIO.
Go fetch them hither; if they deny to come,
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
[Exit Katherina.]

LUCENTIO.
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
HORTENSIO.
And so it is. I wonder what it bodes.
PETRUCHIO.
Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,
An awful rule, and right supremacy;
And, to be short, what not thats sweet and happy.
BAPTISTA.
Now fair befall thee, good Petruchio!
The wager thou hast won; and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changd, as she had never been.
PETRUCHIO.
Nay, I will win my wager better yet,
And show more sign of her obedience,
Her new-built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes, and brings your froward wives
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
Re-enter Katherina with Bianca and Widow.

Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not:
Off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
[Katherina pulls off her cap and throws it down.]

WIDOW.
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh
Till I be brought to such a silly pass!
BIANCA.
Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
LUCENTIO.
I would your duty were as foolish too;
The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
Hath cost me a hundred crowns since supper-time!
BIANCA.
The more fool you for laying on my duty.
PETRUCHIO.
Katherine, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
WIDOW.
Come, come, youre mocking; we will have no telling.
PETRUCHIO.
Come on, I say; and first begin with her.
WIDOW.
She shall not.
PETRUCHIO.
I say she shall: and first begin with her.
KATHERINA.
Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor:
It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,
Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
A woman movd is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty;
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance commits his body
To painful labour both by sea and land,
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe;
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks, and true obedience;
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince,
Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will,
What is she but a foul contending rebel
And graceless traitor to her loving lord?
I am ashamd that women are so simple
To offer war where they should kneel for peace,
Or seek for rule, supremacy, and sway,
When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.
Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions and our hearts
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms!
My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason haply more,
To bandy word for word and frown for frown;
But now I see our lances are but straws,
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husbands foot:
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready; may it do him ease.
PETRUCHIO.
Why, theres a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.
LUCENTIO.
Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt hat.
VINCENTIO.
Tis a good hearing when children are toward.
LUCENTIO.
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.
PETRUCHIO.
Come, Kate, well to bed.
We three are married, but you two are sped.
Twas I won the wager,
[To Lucentio.] though you hit the white;
And being a winner, God give you good night!
[Exeunt Petrucio and Katherina.]

HORTENSIO.
Now go thy ways; thou hast tamd a curst shrew.
LUCENTIO.
Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamd so.
[Exeunt.]


THE TEMPEST
Contents
ACT I
Scene I. On a ship at sea; a tempestuous noise of thunder and lightning heard.
Scene II. The Island. Before the cell of Prospero.

ACT II
Scene I. Another part of the island.
Scene II. Another part of the island.

ACT III
Scene I. Before Prosperos cell.
Scene II. Another part of the island.
Scene III. Another part of the island.

ACT IV
Scene I. Before Prosperos cell.

ACT V
Scene I. Before the cell of Prospero.
Epilogue.

Dramatis Person
ALONSO, King of Naples
SEBASTIAN, his brother
PROSPERO, the right Duke of Milan
ANTONIO, his brother, the usurping Duke of Milan
FERDINAND, Son to the King of Naples
GONZALO, an honest old counsellor
ADRIAN, Lord
FRANCISCO, Lord
CALIBAN, a savage and deformed slave
TRINCULO, a jester
STEPHANO, a drunken butler
MASTER OF A SHIP
BOATSWAIN
MARINERS

MIRANDA, daughter to Prospero

ARIEL, an airy Spirit

IRIS, presented by Spirits
CERES, presented by Spirits
JUNO, presented by Spirits
NYMPHS, presented by Spirits
REAPERS, presented by Spirits

Other Spirits attending on Prospero

SCENE: The sea, with a Ship; afterwards an Island.

ACT I
SCENE I. On a ship at sea; a tempestuous noise of thunder and lightning heard.
Enter a Shipmaster and a Boatswain severally.

MASTER.
Boatswain!

BOATSWAIN.
Here, master: what cheer?

MASTER.
Good! Speak to the mariners: fall to t yarely, or we run ourselves aground: bestir, bestir.

[Exit.]

Enter Mariners.

BOATSWAIN.
Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to th masters whistle. Blow till thou burst thy wind, if room enough.

Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Antonio, Ferdinand, Gonzalo and others.

ALONSO.
Good boatswain, have care. Wheres the master?
Play the men.

BOATSWAIN.
I pray now, keep below.

ANTONIO.
Where is the master, boson?

BOATSWAIN.
Do you not hear him? You mar our labour: keep your cabins: you do assist the storm.

GONZALO.
Nay, good, be patient.

BOATSWAIN.
When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers for the name of king? To cabin! silence! Trouble us not.

GONZALO.
Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.

BOATSWAIN.
None that I more love than myself. You are a counsellor: if you can command these elements to silence, and work the peace of the present, we will not hand a rope more. Use your authority: if you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap.Cheerly, good hearts!Out of our way, I say.

[Exit.]

GONZALO.
I have great comfort from this fellow. Methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him. His complexion is perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging! Make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage! If he be not born to be hangd, our case is miserable.

[Exeunt.]

Re-enter Boatswain.

BOATSWAIN.
Down with the topmast! yare! lower, lower! Bring her to try wi th maincourse.

[A cry within.]

A plague upon this howling! They are louder than the weather or our office.

Enter Sebastian, Antonio and Gonzalo.

Yet again! What do you here? Shall we give oer, and drown? Have you a mind to sink?

SEBASTIAN.
A pox o your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!

BOATSWAIN.
Work you, then.

ANTONIO.
Hang, cur, hang, you whoreson, insolent noisemaker! We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.

GONZALO.
Ill warrant him for drowning, though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell, and as leaky as an unstanched wench.

BOATSWAIN.
Lay her a-hold, a-hold! Set her two courses: off to sea again: lay her off.

Enter Mariners, wet.

MARINERS.
All lost! to prayers, to prayers! all lost!

[Exeunt.]

BOATSWAIN.
What, must our mouths be cold?

GONZALO.
The King and Prince at prayers! Lets assist them,
For our case is as theirs.

SEBASTIAN.
I am out of patience.

ANTONIO.
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards.
This wide-chappd rascalwould thou mightst lie drowning
The washing of ten tides!

GONZALO.
Hell be hangd yet,
Though every drop of water swear against it,
And gape at widst to glut him.

A confused noise within: Mercy on us!
We split, we split!Farewell, my wife and children!
Farewell, brother!We split, we split, we split!

ANTONIO.
Lets all sink wi th King.

[Exit.]

SEBASTIAN.
Lets take leave of him.

[Exit.]

GONZALO.
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground. Long heath, brown furze, anything. The wills above be done! but I would fain die a dry death.

[Exit.]


SCENE II. The Island. Before the cell of Prospero.
Enter Prospero and Miranda.

MIRANDA.
If by your art, my dearest father, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
But that the sea, mounting to th welkins cheek,
Dashes the fire out. O! I have suffered
With those that I saw suffer! A brave vessel,
Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her,
Dashd all to pieces. O, the cry did knock
Against my very heart. Poor souls, they perishd.
Had I been any god of power, I would
Have sunk the sea within the earth, or ere
It should the good ship so have swallowd and
The fraughting souls within her.

PROSPERO.
Be collected:
No more amazement: tell your piteous heart
Theres no harm done.

MIRANDA.
O, woe the day!

PROSPERO.
No harm.
I have done nothing but in care of thee,
Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
Art ignorant of what thou art, nought knowing
Of whence I am, nor that I am more better
Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell,
And thy no greater father.

MIRANDA.
More to know
Did never meddle with my thoughts.

PROSPERO.
Tis time
I should inform thee farther. Lend thy hand,
And pluck my magic garment from me.So:

[Lays down his mantle.]

Lie there my art. Wipe thou thine eyes; have comfort.
The direful spectacle of the wrack, which touchd
The very virtue of compassion in thee,
I have with such provision in mine art
So safely ordered that there is no soul
No, not so much perdition as an hair
Betid to any creature in the vessel
Which thou heardst cry, which thou sawst sink. Sit down;
For thou must now know farther.

MIRANDA.
You have often
Begun to tell me what I am, but stoppd,
And left me to a bootless inquisition,
Concluding Stay; not yet.

PROSPERO.
The hours now come,
The very minute bids thee ope thine ear;
Obey, and be attentive. Canst thou remember
A time before we came unto this cell?
I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not
Out three years old.

MIRANDA.
Certainly, sir, I can.

PROSPERO.
By what? By any other house, or person?
Of anything the image, tell me, that
Hath kept with thy remembrance.

MIRANDA.
Tis far off,
And rather like a dream than an assurance
That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
Four or five women once that tended me?

PROSPERO.
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it
That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else
In the dark backward and abysm of time?
If thou remembrest aught ere thou camst here,
How thou camst here, thou mayst.

MIRANDA.
But that I do not.

PROSPERO.
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
Thy father was the Duke of Milan, and
A prince of power.

MIRANDA.
Sir, are not you my father?

PROSPERO.
Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
She said thou wast my daughter. And thy father
Was Duke of Milan, and his only heir
And princess, no worse issued.

MIRANDA.
O, the heavens!
What foul play had we that we came from thence?
Or blessed wast we did?

PROSPERO.
Both, both, my girl.
By foul play, as thou sayst, were we heavd thence;
But blessedly holp hither.

MIRANDA.
O, my heart bleeds
To think o th teen that I have turnd you to,
Which is from my remembrance. Please you, farther.

PROSPERO.
My brother and thy uncle, calld Antonio
I pray thee, mark me, that a brother should
Be so perfidious!he whom next thyself
Of all the world I lovd, and to him put
The manage of my state; as at that time
Through all the signories it was the first,
And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed
In dignity, and for the liberal arts,
Without a parallel: those being all my study,
The government I cast upon my brother,
And to my state grew stranger, being transported
And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle
Dost thou attend me?

MIRANDA.
Sir, most heedfully.

PROSPERO.
Being once perfected how to grant suits,
How to deny them, who t advance, and who
To trash for over-topping, new created
The creatures that were mine, I say, or changd em,
Or else new formd em: having both the key
Of officer and office, set all hearts i th state
To what tune pleasd his ear: that now he was
The ivy which had hid my princely trunk,
And suckd my verdure out on t. Thou attendst not.

MIRANDA.
O, good sir! I do.

PROSPERO.
I pray thee, mark me.
I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
To closeness and the bettering of my mind
With that which, but by being so retird,
Oer-prizd all popular rate, in my false brother
Awakd an evil nature; and my trust,
Like a good parent, did beget of him
A falsehood in its contrary as great
As my trust was; which had indeed no limit,
A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded,
Not only with what my revenue yielded,
But what my power might else exact, like one
Who having into truth, by telling of it,
Made such a sinner of his memory,
To credit his own lie, he did believe
He was indeed the Duke; out o the substitution,
And executing th outward face of royalty,
With all prerogative. Hence his ambition growing
Dost thou hear?

MIRANDA.
Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.

PROSPERO.
To have no screen between this part he playd
And him he playd it for, he needs will be
Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library
Was dukedom large enough: of temporal royalties
He thinks me now incapable; confederates,
So dry he was for sway, wi th King of Naples
To give him annual tribute, do him homage,
Subject his coronet to his crown, and bend
The dukedom, yet unbowdalas, poor Milan!
To most ignoble stooping.

MIRANDA.
O the heavens!

PROSPERO.
Mark his condition, and the event; then tell me
If this might be a brother.

MIRANDA.
I should sin
To think but nobly of my grandmother:
Good wombs have borne bad sons.

PROSPERO.
Now the condition.
This King of Naples, being an enemy
To me inveterate, hearkens my brothers suit;
Which was, that he, in lieu o th premises
Of homage and I know not how much tribute,
Should presently extirpate me and mine
Out of the dukedom, and confer fair Milan,
With all the honours on my brother: whereon,
A treacherous army levied, one midnight
Fated to th purpose, did Antonio open
The gates of Milan; and, i th dead of darkness,
The ministers for th purpose hurried thence
Me and thy crying self.

MIRANDA.
Alack, for pity!
I, not remembring how I cried out then,
Will cry it oer again: it is a hint
That wrings mine eyes to t.

PROSPERO.
Hear a little further,
And then Ill bring thee to the present business
Which nows upon us; without the which this story
Were most impertinent.

MIRANDA.
Wherefore did they not
That hour destroy us?

PROSPERO.
Well demanded, wench:
My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,
So dear the love my people bore me, nor set
A mark so bloody on the business; but
With colours fairer painted their foul ends.
In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,
Bore us some leagues to sea, where they prepared
A rotten carcass of a butt, not riggd,
Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
Instinctively have quit it. There they hoist us,
To cry to th sea, that roard to us; to sigh
To th winds, whose pity, sighing back again,
Did us but loving wrong.

MIRANDA.
Alack, what trouble
Was I then to you!

PROSPERO.
O, a cherubin
Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile,
Infused with a fortitude from heaven,
When I have deckd the sea with drops full salt,
Under my burden groand: which raisd in me
An undergoing stomach, to bear up
Against what should ensue.

MIRANDA.
How came we ashore?

PROSPERO.
By Providence divine.
Some food we had and some fresh water that
A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,
Out of his charity, who being then appointed
Master of this design, did give us, with
Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries,
Which since have steaded much: so, of his gentleness,
Knowing I lovd my books, he furnishd me
From mine own library with volumes that
I prize above my dukedom.

MIRANDA.
Would I might
But ever see that man!

PROSPERO.
Now I arise.
Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
Here in this island we arrivd; and here
Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
Than other princes can, that have more time
For vainer hours, and tutors not so careful.

MIRANDA.
Heavens thank you for t! And now, I pray you, sir,
For still tis beating in my mind, your reason
For raising this sea-storm?

PROSPERO.
Know thus far forth.
By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune,
Now my dear lady, hath mine enemies
Brought to this shore; and by my prescience
I find my zenith doth depend upon
A most auspicious star, whose influence
If now I court not but omit, my fortunes
Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions;
Thou art inclind to sleep; tis a good dulness,
And give it way. I know thou canst not choose.

[Miranda sleeps.]

Come away, servant, come! I am ready now.
Approach, my Ariel. Come!

Enter Ariel.

ARIEL.
All hail, great master! grave sir, hail! I come
To answer thy best pleasure; bet to fly,
To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
On the curld clouds, to thy strong bidding task
Ariel and all his quality.

PROSPERO.
Hast thou, spirit,
Performd to point the tempest that I bade thee?

ARIEL.
To every article.
I boarded the Kings ship; now on the beak,
Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
I flamd amazement; sometime Id divide,
And burn in many places; on the topmast,
The yards, and boresprit, would I flame distinctly,
Then meet and join. Joves lightning, the precursors
O th dreadful thunder-claps, more momentary
And sight-outrunning were not: the fire and cracks
Of sulphurous roaring the most mighty Neptune
Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,
Yea, his dread trident shake.

PROSPERO.
My brave spirit!
Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
Would not infect his reason?

ARIEL.
Not a soul
But felt a fever of the mad, and playd
Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners
Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,
Then all afire with me: the Kings son, Ferdinand,
With hair up-staringthen like reeds, not hair
Was the first man that leapt; cried Hell is empty,
And all the devils are here.

PROSPERO.
Why, thats my spirit!
But was not this nigh shore?

ARIEL.
Close by, my master.

PROSPERO.
But are they, Ariel, safe?

ARIEL.
Not a hair perishd;
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
But fresher than before: and, as thou badst me,
In troops I have dispersd them bout the isle.
The Kings son have I landed by himself,
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,
His arms in this sad knot.

PROSPERO.
Of the Kings ship
The mariners, say how thou hast disposd,
And all the rest o th fleet?

ARIEL.
Safely in harbour
Is the Kings ship; in the deep nook, where once
Thou calldst me up at midnight to fetch dew
From the still-vexd Bermoothes; there shes hid:
The mariners all under hatches stowed;
Who, with a charm joind to their suffred labour,
I have left asleep: and for the rest o th fleet,
Which I dispersd, they all have met again,
And are upon the Mediterranean flote
Bound sadly home for Naples,
Supposing that they saw the Kings ship wrackd,
And his great person perish.

PROSPERO.
Ariel, thy charge
Exactly is performd; but theres more work.
What is the time o th day?

ARIEL.
Past the mid season.

PROSPERO.
At least two glasses. The time twixt six and now
Must by us both be spent most preciously.

ARIEL.
Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
Let me remember thee what thou hast promisd,
Which is not yet performd me.

PROSPERO.
How now! moody?
What ist thou canst demand?

ARIEL.
My liberty.

PROSPERO.
Before the time be out? No more!

ARIEL.
I prithee,
Remember I have done thee worthy service;
Told thee no lies, made no mistakings, servd
Without or grudge or grumblings: thou didst promise
To bate me a full year.

PROSPERO.
Dost thou forget
From what a torment I did free thee?

ARIEL.
No.

PROSPERO.
Thou dost, and thinkst it much to tread the ooze
Of the salt deep,
To run upon the sharp wind of the north,
To do me business in the veins o th earth
When it is bakd with frost.

ARIEL.
I do not, sir.

PROSPERO.
Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot
The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
Was grown into a hoop? Hast thou forgot her?

ARIEL.
No, sir.

PROSPERO.
Thou hast. Where was she born? Speak; tell me.

ARIEL.
Sir, in Argier.

PROSPERO.
O, was she so? I must
Once in a month recount what thou hast been,
Which thou forgetst. This damnd witch Sycorax,
For mischiefs manifold, and sorceries terrible
To enter human hearing, from Argier,
Thou knowst, was banishd: for one thing she did
They would not take her life. Is not this true?

ARIEL.
Ay, sir.

PROSPERO.
This blue-eyd hag was hither brought with child,
And here was left by th sailors. Thou, my slave,
As thou reportst thyself, wast then her servant;
And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate
To act her earthy and abhorrd commands,
Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee,
By help of her more potent ministers,
And in her most unmitigable rage,
Into a cloven pine; within which rift
Imprisond, thou didst painfully remain
A dozen years; within which space she died,
And left thee there, where thou didst vent thy groans
As fast as mill-wheels strike. Then was this island
Save for the son that she did litter here,
A freckld whelp, hag-bornnot honourd with
A human shape.

ARIEL.
Yes, Caliban her son.

PROSPERO.
Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban,
Whom now I keep in service. Thou best knowst
What torment I did find thee in; thy groans
Did make wolves howl, and penetrate the breasts
Of ever-angry bears: it was a torment
To lay upon the damnd, which Sycorax
Could not again undo; it was mine art,
When I arrivd and heard thee, that made gape
The pine, and let thee out.

ARIEL.
I thank thee, master.

PROSPERO.
If thou more murmurst, I will rend an oak
And peg thee in his knotty entrails till
Thou hast howld away twelve winters.

ARIEL.
Pardon, master:
I will be correspondent to command,
And do my spriting gently.

PROSPERO.
Do so; and after two days
I will discharge thee.

ARIEL.
Thats my noble master!
What shall I do? Say what? What shall I do?

PROSPERO.
Go make thyself like a nymph o th sea. Be subject
To no sight but thine and mine; invisible
To every eyeball else. Go, take this shape,
And hither come in t. Go, hence with diligence!

[Exit Ariel.]

Awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well;
Awake!

MIRANDA.
[Waking.] The strangeness of your story put
Heaviness in me.

PROSPERO.
Shake it off. Come on;
Well visit Caliban my slave, who never
Yields us kind answer.

MIRANDA.
Tis a villain, sir,
I do not love to look on.

PROSPERO.
But as tis,
We cannot miss him: he does make our fire,
Fetch in our wood; and serves in offices
That profit us. What ho! slave! Caliban!
Thou earth, thou! Speak.

CALIBAN.
[Within.] Theres wood enough within.

PROSPERO.
Come forth, I say; theres other business for thee.
Come, thou tortoise! when?

Re-enter Ariel like a water-nymph.

Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,
Hark in thine ear.

ARIEL.
My lord, it shall be done.

[Exit.]

PROSPERO.
Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
Upon thy wicked dam, come forth!

Enter Caliban.

CALIBAN.
As wicked dew as eer my mother brushd
With ravens feather from unwholesome fen
Drop on you both! A south-west blow on ye,
And blister you all oer!

PROSPERO.
For this, be sure, tonight thou shalt have cramps,
Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up; urchins
Shall forth at vast of night that they may work
All exercise on thee. Thou shalt be pinchd
As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
Than bees that made them.

CALIBAN.
I must eat my dinner.
This islands mine, by Sycorax my mother,
Which thou takst from me. When thou camst first,
Thou strokst me and made much of me; wouldst give me
Water with berries in t; and teach me how
To name the bigger light, and how the less,
That burn by day and night: and then I lovd thee,
And showd thee all the qualities o th isle,
The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren place, and fertile.
Cursd be I that did so! All the charms
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!
For I am all the subjects that you have,
Which first was mine own King; and here you sty me
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
The rest o th island.

PROSPERO.
Thou most lying slave,
Whom stripes may move, not kindness! I have usd thee,
Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodgd thee
In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate
The honour of my child.

CALIBAN.
Oh ho! Oh ho! Would t had been done!
Thou didst prevent me; I had peopled else
This isle with Calibans.

PROSPERO.
Abhorred slave,
Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
One thing or other: when thou didst not, savage,
Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like
A thing most brutish, I endowd thy purposes
With words that made them known. But thy vile race,
Though thou didst learn, had that in t which good natures
Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
Deservedly confind into this rock,
Who hadst deservd more than a prison.

CALIBAN.
You taught me language, and my profit on t
Is, I know how to curse. The red plague rid you,
For learning me your language!

PROSPERO.
Hag-seed, hence!
Fetch us in fuel; and be quick, thou rt best,
To answer other business. Shrugst thou, malice?
If thou neglectst, or dost unwillingly
What I command, Ill rack thee with old cramps,
Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar,
That beasts shall tremble at thy din.

CALIBAN.
No, pray thee.
[Aside.] I must obey. His art is of such power,
It would control my dams god, Setebos,
And make a vassal of him.

PROSPERO.
So, slave, hence!

[Exit Caliban.]

Re-enter Ariel, playing and singing; Ferdinand following.

ARIELS SONG.

Come unto these yellow sands,
    And then take hands:
Curtsied when you have, and kissd
    The wild waves whist.
Foot it featly here and there,
    And sweet sprites bear
The burden. Hark, hark!
    Burden dispersedly. Bow-wow.
The watch dogs bark.
    [Burden dispersedly.] Bow-wow.
Hark, hark! I hear
The strain of strutting chanticleer
    Cry cock-a-diddle-dow.

FERDINAND.
Where should this music be? i th air or th earth?
It sounds no more; and sure it waits upon
Some god o th island. Sitting on a bank,
Weeping again the King my fathers wrack,
This music crept by me upon the waters,
Allaying both their fury and my passion
With its sweet air: thence I have followd it,
Or it hath drawn me rather,but tis gone.
No, it begins again.

ARIEL.
[Sings.]
Full fathom five thy father lies.
    Of his bones are coral made.
Those are pearls that were his eyes.
    Nothing of him that doth fade
But doth suffer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange.
Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell:
    Burden: Ding-dong.
Hark! now I hear them: ding-dong, bell.

FERDINAND.
The ditty does remember my drownd father.
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
That the earth owes:I hear it now above me.

PROSPERO.
The fringed curtains of thine eye advance,
And say what thou seest yond.

MIRANDA.
What ist? a spirit?
Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
It carries a brave form. But tis a spirit.

PROSPERO.
No, wench; it eats and sleeps and hath such senses
As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest
Was in the wrack; and, but hes something staind
With grief,thats beautys canker,thou mightst call him
A goodly person: he hath lost his fellows
And strays about to find em.

MIRANDA.
I might call him
A thing divine; for nothing natural
I ever saw so noble.

PROSPERO.
[Aside.] It goes on, I see,
As my soul prompts it. Spirit, fine spirit! Ill free thee
Within two days for this.

FERDINAND.
Most sure, the goddess
On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe, my prayer
May know if you remain upon this island;
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here: my prime request,
Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder!
If you be maid or no?

MIRANDA.
No wonder, sir;
But certainly a maid.

FERDINAND.
My language! Heavens!
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Were I but where tis spoken.

PROSPERO.
How! the best?
What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard thee?

FERDINAND.
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
And that he does I weep: myself am Naples,
Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
The King my father wrackd.

MIRANDA.
Alack, for mercy!

FERDINAND.
Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of Milan,
And his brave son being twain.

PROSPERO.
[Aside.] The Duke of Milan
And his more braver daughter could control thee,
If now twere fit to dot. At the first sight
They have changed eyes. Delicate Ariel,
Ill set thee free for this. [To Ferdinand.] A word, good sir.
I fear you have done yourself some wrong: a word.

MIRANDA.
Why speaks my father so ungently? This
Is the third man that eer I saw; the first
That eer I sighd for. Pity move my father
To be inclind my way!

FERDINAND.
O! if a virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, Ill make you
The Queen of Naples.

PROSPERO.
Soft, sir; one word more.
[Aside.] They are both in eithers powers. But this swift business
I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
Make the prize light. [To Ferdinand.] One word more. I charge thee
That thou attend me. Thou dost here usurp
The name thou owst not; and hast put thyself
Upon this island as a spy, to win it
From me, the lord on t.

FERDINAND.
No, as I am a man.

MIRANDA.
Theres nothing ill can dwell in such a temple:
If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
Good things will strive to dwell with t.

PROSPERO.
[To Ferdinand.] Follow me.
[To Miranda.] Speak not you for him; hes a traitor.
[To Ferdinand.] Come;
Ill manacle thy neck and feet together:
Sea-water shalt thou drink; thy food shall be
The fresh-brook mussels, witherd roots, and husks
Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.

FERDINAND.
No;
I will resist such entertainment till
Mine enemy has more power.

[He draws, and is charmed from moving.]

MIRANDA.
O dear father!
Make not too rash a trial of him, for
Hes gentle, and not fearful.

PROSPERO.
What! I say,
My foot my tutor? Put thy sword up, traitor;
Who makst a show, but darst not strike, thy conscience
Is so possessd with guilt: come from thy ward,
For I can here disarm thee with this stick
And make thy weapon drop.

MIRANDA.
Beseech you, father!

PROSPERO.
Hence! Hang not on my garments.

MIRANDA.
Sir, have pity;
Ill be his surety.

PROSPERO.
Silence! One word more
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What!
An advocate for an impostor? hush!
Thou thinkst there is no more such shapes as he,
Having seen but him and Caliban: foolish wench!
To th most of men this is a Caliban,
And they to him are angels.

MIRANDA.
My affections
Are then most humble; I have no ambition
To see a goodlier man.

PROSPERO.
[To Ferdinand.] Come on; obey:
Thy nerves are in their infancy again,
And have no vigour in them.

FERDINAND.
So they are:
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My fathers loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wrack of all my friends, nor this mans threats,
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid: all corners else o th earth
Let liberty make use of; space enough
Have I in such a prison.

PROSPERO.
[Aside.] It works. [To Ferdinand.] Come on.
Thou hast done well, fine Ariel! [To Ferdinand.] Follow me.
[To Ariel.] Hark what thou else shalt do me.

MIRANDA.
Be of comfort;
My fathers of a better nature, sir,
Than he appears by speech: this is unwonted
Which now came from him.

PROSPERO.
Thou shalt be as free
As mountain winds; but then exactly do
All points of my command.

ARIEL.
To th syllable.

PROSPERO.
[To Ferdinand.] Come, follow. Speak not for him.

[Exeunt.]


ACT II
SCENE I. Another part of the island.
Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Antonio, Gonzalo, Adrian, Francisco and others.

GONZALO.
Beseech you, sir, be merry; you have cause,
So have we all, of joy; for our escape
Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
Is common; every day, some sailors wife,
The masters of some merchant and the merchant,
Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
I mean our preservation, few in millions
Can speak like us: then wisely, good sir, weigh
Our sorrow with our comfort.

ALONSO.
Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN.
He receives comfort like cold porridge.

ANTONIO.
The visitor will not give him oer so.

SEBASTIAN.
Look, hes winding up the watch of his wit; by and by it will strike.

GONZALO.
Sir,

SEBASTIAN.
One: tell.

GONZALO.
When every grief is entertaind thats offerd,
Comes to the entertainer

SEBASTIAN.
A dollar.

GONZALO.
Dolour comes to him, indeed: you have spoken truer than you purposed.

SEBASTIAN.
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.

GONZALO.
Therefore, my lord,

ANTONIO.
Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!

ALONSO.
I prithee, spare.

GONZALO.
Well, I have done: but yet

SEBASTIAN.
He will be talking.

ANTONIO.
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good wager, first begins to crow?

SEBASTIAN.
The old cock.

ANTONIO.
The cockerel.

SEBASTIAN.
Done. The wager?

ANTONIO.
A laughter.

SEBASTIAN.
A match!

ADRIAN.
Though this island seem to be desert,

ANTONIO.
Ha, ha, ha!

SEBASTIAN.
So. Youre paid.

ADRIAN.
Uninhabitable, and almost inaccessible,

SEBASTIAN.
Yet

ADRIAN.
Yet

ANTONIO.
He could not miss t.

ADRIAN.
It must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate temperance.

ANTONIO.
Temperance was a delicate wench.

SEBASTIAN.
Ay, and a subtle; as he most learnedly delivered.

ADRIAN.
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.

SEBASTIAN.
As if it had lungs, and rotten ones.

ANTONIO.
Or, as twere perfumd by a fen.

GONZALO.
Here is everything advantageous to life.

ANTONIO.
True; save means to live.

SEBASTIAN.
Of that theres none, or little.

GONZALO.
How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!

ANTONIO.
The ground indeed is tawny.

SEBASTIAN.
With an eye of green int.

ANTONIO.
He misses not much.

SEBASTIAN.
No; he doth but mistake the truth totally.

GONZALO.
But the rarity of it is,which is indeed almost beyond credit,

SEBASTIAN.
As many vouchd rarities are.

GONZALO.
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water.

ANTONIO.
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not say he lies?

SEBASTIAN.
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report.

GONZALO.
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of the Kings fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.

SEBASTIAN.
Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.

ADRIAN.
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their Queen.

GONZALO.
Not since widow Didos time.

ANTONIO.
Widow! a pox o that! How came that widow in? Widow Dido!

SEBASTIAN.
What if he had said, widower Aeneas too?
Good Lord, how you take it!

ADRIAN.
Widow Dido said you? You make me study of that; she was of Carthage, not of Tunis.

GONZALO.
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.

ADRIAN.
Carthage?

GONZALO.
I assure you, Carthage.

ANTONIO.
His word is more than the miraculous harp.

SEBASTIAN.
He hath raisd the wall, and houses too.

ANTONIO.
What impossible matter will he make easy next?

SEBASTIAN.
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket, and give it his son for an apple.

ANTONIO.
And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring forth more islands.

ALONSO.
Ay.

ANTONIO.
Why, in good time.

GONZALO.
[To Alonso.] Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now Queen.

ANTONIO.
And the rarest that eer came there.

SEBASTIAN.
Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.

ANTONIO.
O! widow Dido; ay, widow Dido.

GONZALO.
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it? I mean, in a sort.

ANTONIO.
That sort was well fishd for.

GONZALO.
When I wore it at your daughters marriage?

ALONSO.
You cram these words into mine ears against
The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
Married my daughter there! for, coming thence,
My son is lost; and, in my rate, she too,
Who is so far from Italy removed,
I neer again shall see her. O thou mine heir
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
Hath made his meal on thee?

FRANCISCO.
Sir, he may live:
I saw him beat the surges under him,
And ride upon their backs. He trod the water,
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
The surge most swoln that met him. His bold head
Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
To th shore, that oer his wave-worn basis bowed,
As stooping to relieve him. I not doubt
He came alive to land.

ALONSO.
No, no, hes gone.

SEBASTIAN.
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
But rather lose her to an African;
Where she, at least, is banishd from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet the grief on t.

ALONSO.
Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN.
You were kneeld to, and importund otherwise
By all of us; and the fair soul herself
Weighd between loathness and obedience at
Which end o th beam should bow. We have lost your son,
I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have
More widows in them of this business making,
Than we bring men to comfort them.
The faults your own.

ALONSO.
So is the dearst o th loss.

GONZALO.
My lord Sebastian,
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness
And time to speak it in. You rub the sore,
When you should bring the plaster.

SEBASTIAN.
Very well.

ANTONIO.
And most chirurgeonly.

GONZALO.
It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
When you are cloudy.

SEBASTIAN.
Foul weather?

ANTONIO.
Very foul.

GONZALO.
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord,

ANTONIO.
Hed sow t with nettle-seed.

SEBASTIAN.
Or docks, or mallows.

GONZALO.
And were the King ont, what would I do?

SEBASTIAN.
Scape being drunk for want of wine.

GONZALO.
I th commonwealth I would by contraries
Execute all things; for no kind of traffic
Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
And use of service, none; contract, succession,
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
No occupation; all men idle, all;
And women too, but innocent and pure;
No sovereignty,

SEBASTIAN.
Yet he would be King ont.

ANTONIO.
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the beginning.

GONZALO.
All things in common nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavour; treason, felony,
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
Would I not have; but nature should bring forth,
Of it own kind, all foison, all abundance,
To feed my innocent people.

SEBASTIAN.
No marrying mong his subjects?

ANTONIO.
None, man; all idle; whores and knaves.

GONZALO.
I would with such perfection govern, sir,
T excel the Golden Age.

SEBASTIAN.
Save his Majesty!

ANTONIO.
Long live Gonzalo!

GONZALO.
And,do you mark me, sir?

ALONSO.
Prithee, no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.

GONZALO.
I do well believe your highness; and did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh at nothing.

ANTONIO.
Twas you we laughed at.

GONZALO.
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you. So you may continue, and laugh at nothing still.

ANTONIO.
What a blow was there given!

SEBASTIAN.
An it had not fallen flat-long.

GONZALO.
You are gentlemen of brave mettle. You would lift the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue in it five weeks without changing.

Enter Ariel, invisible, playing solemn music.

SEBASTIAN.
We would so, and then go a-bat-fowling.

ANTONIO.
Nay, good my lord, be not angry.

GONZALO.
No, I warrant you; I will not adventure my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh me asleep, for I am very heavy?

ANTONIO.
Go sleep, and hear us.

[All sleep but Alonso, Sebastian and Antonio.]

ALONSO.
What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts: I find
They are inclind to do so.

SEBASTIAN.
Please you, sir,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
It is a comforter.
